

=== PAGE 1 ===

Citation: Li, J.; Dong, R.; Wu, X.;
Huang, W.; Lin, P . A Self-Learning
Hyper-Heuristic Algorithm Based on
a Genetic Algorithm: A Case Study on
Prefabricated Modular Cabin Unit
Logistics Scheduling in a Cruise Ship
Manufacturer. Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
biomimetics9090516
Academic Editors: Ameer Hamza
Khan and Danish Hussain
Received: 10 July 2024
Revised: 21 August 2024
Accepted: 21 August 2024
Published: 27 August 2024
Copyright: ©2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
biomimetics 
Article
A Self-Learning Hyper-Heuristic Algorithm Based on a Genetic
Algorithm: A Case Study on Prefabricated Modular Cabin Unit
Logistics Scheduling in a Cruise Ship Manufacturer
Jinghua Li1,2, Ruipu Dong3,*, Xiaoyuan Wu4,*, Wenhao Huang3
and Pengfei Lin3
1College of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China
2Sanya Nanhai Innovation and Development Base of Harbin Engineering University, Harbin Engineering
University, Sanya 572024, China
3College of Shipbuilding Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China
4Shanghai Waigaoqiao Shipbuilding Co., Ltd., Shanghai 200137, China
*Correspondence: dongruipu@hrbeu.edu.cn (R.D.); wxy@chinasws.com (X.W.)
Abstract: Hyper-heuristic algorithms are known for their flexibility and efficiency, making them
suitable for solving engineering optimization problems with complex constraints. This paper intro-
duces a self-learning hyper-heuristic algorithm based on a genetic algorithm (GA-SLHH) designed
to tackle the logistics scheduling problem of prefabricated modular cabin units (PMCUs) in cruise
ships. This problem can be regarded as a multi-objective fuzzy logistics collaborative scheduling
problem. Hyper-heuristic algorithms effectively avoid the extensive evaluation and repair of infeasi-
ble solutions during the iterative process, which is a common issue in meta-heuristic algorithms. The
GA-SLHH employs a genetic algorithm combined with a self-learning strategy as its high-level strat-
egy (HLS), optimizing low-level heuristics (LLHs) while uncovering potential relationships between
adjacent decision-making stages. LLHs utilize classic scheduling rules as solution support. Multiple
sets of numerical experiments demonstrate that the GA-SLHH exhibits a stronger comprehensive
optimization ability and stability when solving this problem. Finally, the validity of the GA-SLHH in
addressing real-world decision-making issues in cruise ship manufacturing companies is validated
through practical enterprise cases. The results of a practical enterprise case show that the scheme
solved using the proposed GA-SLHH can reduce the transportation time by up to 37%.
Keywords: self-learning hyper-heuristic algorithm based on genetic algorithm; fuzzy logistics
scheduling; cruise ship; PMCU
1. Introduction
Meta-heuristic algorithms are a class of algorithms used to solve complex optimiza-
tion problems through searching and iteration to find the optimal or sub-optimal solution
to the problem. This kind of algorithm has been widely used in various optimization
problems (such as shop scheduling, path planning, service scheduling, etc.) because of
its practicability and generality. Currently, meta-heuristic algorithms can be divided into
evolutionary-based algorithms, bio-based algorithms, human-based algorithms, physics-
based algorithms, math-based algorithms, and other algorithms [ 1,2]. However, when
the meta-heuristic algorithm deals with optimization problems with some complex con-
straints, there are some shortcomings in the flexibility of operation in an individual iteration.
Hyper-heuristic algorithms offer significant advantages in solving complex optimization
problems [ 3,4]. Their primary strength lies in their ability to dynamically select or generate
heuristics during the problem-solving process, leading to more efficient and effective so-
lutions [ 5]. This flexibility allows hyper-heuristic algorithms to adapt to a wide range of
problem types and constraints, making them highly applicable in various fields, includ-
ing decision making, manufacturing, and logistics [ 6,7]. This feature enables the efficient
Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516. https://doi.org/10.3390/biomimetics9090516 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/biomimetics


=== PAGE 2 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 2 of 29
scheduling of the prefabricated modular cabin unit (PMCU) logistics process with complex
processes and task interactions. This occurs very frequently in cruise ship manufacturers
but lacks an effective scheduling scheme to guide the process.
The prefabricated modular cabin unit (PMCU) is currently the most popular technol-
ogy used by cruise ship manufacturers for the construction of large numbers of cabins [8].
Assembly in the workshop and transportation on board are the logistical processes that
manufacturers have to go through in order to adopt this technology [ 9,10]. A diagram of
PMCU logistics within the shipyard is shown in Figure 1. Once the PMCUs have been
assembled, they will be moved from the assembly line into a temporary yard, transported
by delivery trucks to the shipyard as required, and then transported on board the ship via a
specialized cabin lift. The cabin lift also undertakes the transportation process for outfitting
supply embarkation. With multiple types of embarkation tasks running in parallel, the
impact of multi-task occupancy also needs to be taken into account when establishing the
PMCU embarkation plan. It can be seen that the yard operations and transportation of PM-
CUs have well-connected logistics. PMCU logistics comprises a series of mutual influences
and mutual constraints of the operation process, requiring various types of equipment and
resources. As can be seen, PMCU logistics needs a rational and effective production scheme
to guide its activities. Unfortunately, domestic manufacturers are not able to effectively
schedule this logistical process, leading to actual transportation inefficiency and a lack of
ability to meet the planned expectations of the cruise project. Therefore, the aim of this
study is to develop and introduce a novel and effective scheduling method based on a
hyper-heuristic framework for optimizing cruise ships.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 31 
 
 solutions [5]. This flexibility allows hyper-heuristic algorithms to adapt to a wide range of 
problem types and constraints, making them highly applicable in various fields, including 
decision making, manufacturing, and logistic s [6,7]. This feature enables the efficient 
scheduling of the prefabricated modular cabin unit (PMCU) logistics process with com-
plex processes and task interactions. This occurs very frequently in cruise ship manufac-
turers but lacks an effective scheduling scheme to guide the process. 
The prefabricated modular cabin unit (PMCU)  is currently the most popular technol-
ogy used by cruise ship manufacturers for the construction of large numbers of cabins [8]. 
Assembly in the workshop and transportation on board are the logistical processes that 
manufacturers have to go through in order to  adopt this technology [9,10]. A diagram of 
PMCU logistics within the shipyard is shown in Figure 1. Once the PMCUs have been assembled, they will be moved from the assembly line into a temporary yard, transported 
by delivery trucks to the shipyard as required, and then transported on board the ship via 
a specialized cabin lift. The cabin lift also undertakes the transportation process for outfit-
ting supply embarkation. With multiple types of embarkation tasks running in parallel, 
the impact of multi-task occupancy also needs to be taken into account when establishing 
the PMCU embarkation plan. It can be seen that the yard operations and transportation 
of PMCUs have well-connected logistics. PMCU logistics comprises a series of mutual 
influences and mutual constraints of the op eration process, requiring various types of 
equipment and resources. As can be seen, PM CU logistics needs a rational and effective 
production scheme to guide it s activities. Unfortunately, do mestic manufacturers are not 
able to effectively schedule this logistical pr ocess, leading to actual transportation ineffi-
ciency and a lack of ability to meet the pla nned expectations of the cruise project. There-
fore, the aim of this study is to develop and introduce a novel and effective scheduling 
method based on a hyper-heuristic fram ework for optimizing cruise ships. 
 
Figure 1. Three stages of PMCU logistics. 
Unlike the highly automated logistics industry, the shipbuilding industry belongs to 
the large-scale structure and equipment manufacturing industry in which the transporta-tion of intermediate products is less automated and standardized [11]. For the logistics of 
the PMCUs of cruise ships, yard operations  and transportation co llaboration processes 
have the following characteristics: (1) adopting Just-In-Time (JIT) mode, the transporta-
tion and completion times of PMCUs are uncert ain; (2) cruise ship production is subject 
to strict plan constraints, and the scheme needs to match the plan as closely as possible while maintaining efficiency; (3) the time re quired for different equipment to transport 
different PMCUs is uncertain, wh ich is influenced by several factors, such as worker pro-
ficiency, yard placement, etc.; and (4) the nu mber of equipment resources is limited, and 
multiple types of jobs share the same type of equipment. Although some of the cases re-
lated to the logistics industry also have such characteristics, the application of a large number of automated equipment makes the logi stics process more effi cient, accurate, and 
Figure 1. Three stages of PMCU logistics.
Unlike the highly automated logistics industry, the shipbuilding industry belongs to
the large-scale structure and equipment manufacturing industry in which the transportation
of intermediate products is less automated and standardized [ 11]. For the logistics of the
PMCUs of cruise ships, yard operations and transportation collaboration processes have
the following characteristics: (1) adopting Just-In-Time (JIT) mode, the transportation and
completion times of PMCUs are uncertain; (2) cruise ship production is subject to strict
plan constraints, and the scheme needs to match the plan as closely as possible while
maintaining efficiency; (3) the time required for different equipment to transport different
PMCUs is uncertain, which is influenced by several factors, such as worker proficiency, yard
placement, etc.; and (4) the number of equipment resources is limited, and multiple types of
jobs share the same type of equipment. Although some of the cases related to the logistics
industry also have such characteristics, the application of a large number of automated
equipment makes the logistics process more efficient, accurate, and collaborative. The
transportation time and delivery time can be effectively described by using fixed time.
At present, existing studies on ship intermediate product logistics [ 12–15] have not
considered the characteristics of cruise ship PMCU logistics comprehensively. During
actual PMCU logistics, the domestic cruise manufacturer mainly adopts human decision
making and on-site scheduling, lacking the scheduling methodology oriented to the overall


=== PAGE 3 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 3 of 29
cruise project, which leads to the independence of the various parts of the process, resulting
in low efficiency and accuracy. Under these circumstances, the main contributions of this
study can be summarized as follows:
1. This paper formulates a multi-objective fuzzy equipment collaborative scheduling
model for PMCU logistics, predicated on maximizing the average agreement index of
fuzzy due dates and minimizing the maximum fuzzy makespan, thereby addressing
inherent uncertainties in cruise shipyard operations.
2. A new genetic hyper-heuristic algorithm with a self-learning mechanism (GA-SLHH)
is proposed in this paper. In the GA-SLHH framework, low-level heuristics (LLHs)
are composed of a set of classical scheduling rules. The high-level strategy (HLS)
is composed of a genetic algorithm (GA) and self-learning mechanism. The HLS
iteratively optimizes the LLHs, which, in turn, control the solution of the collaborative
scheduling model of PMCU logistics.
3. The feasibility and applicability of the GA-SLHH proposed in this paper are verified
through numerical experiments and enterprise case verification with well-known
meta-heuristic algorithms (i.e., GA and PSO), classical scheduling rules, and genetic
hyper-heuristic algorithms without a self-learning mechanism (GA-HH).
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives a review of the
related literature. Section 3 presents the problem description and proposes a mixed-integer
linear programming formulation. Section 4 proposes a self-learning hyper-heuristic algo-
rithm based on a genetic algorithm (GA-SLHH). The design of the numerical experiments
and analysis of the results are given in Section 5. Section 6 suggests approaches of research
for enterprise decision makers and management. Section 7 gives the conclusions of this
paper and directions for future research.
2. Related Research
Scheduling in the shipbuilding industry involves the strategic allocation and organiza-
tion of resources, personnel, and equipment, in accordance with work plans and real-world
conditions. To facilitate coordinated operations and achieve predefined objectives. Existing
research in the shipbuilding industry has focused on specific scheduling areas including
workshop scheduling [16–21], transport scheduling [12,22–25], spatial scheduling [26–28],
project scheduling [ 29–31], yard scheduling [ 32,33], etc. Nonetheless, these studies largely
address isolated shipbuilding processes. The complex challenges posed by collaborative
scheduling, which necessitates the integration of multiple operations and diverse equip-
ment types, remain underexplored. This type of collaborative scheduling problem is more
commonly studied in the logistics industry, represented by container terminals [ 34,35].
Related studies tend to be orientated toward logistics scenarios with a high prevalence of
automated equipment, while the studies are also characterized by unidirectionality and
homogeneity. The scheduling problem within the cruise ship manufacturing enterprise
needs to be combined with the production operation mode to consider labor, equipment,
schedule, plan agreement, and other factors, and to make a scheduling scheme under
the time uncertain environment, which is more complicated compared with the logistics
industry. For such problems, scholars often use fuzzy time for uncertain environment
descriptions [ 36–38], converting conventional scheduling schemes into fuzzy scheduling
schemes to guide schemes with more application possibilities. At the same time, in a com-
plex decision-making process, decision-makers in a cruise ship manufacturing enterprise
will develop scheduling schemes by making decisions at each decision point based on
experience. Furthermore, the potential dependencies between consecutive decisions, when
considered in scheduling, can offer comprehensive decision-making paradigms for the
enterprise, surpassing the support of a singular scheme for isolated issues.
Research on methods for addressing similar scheduling problems includes meth-
ods such as exact algorithms [ 39,40], heuristic algorithms [ 41], and meta-heuristic algo-
rithms [ 42,43]. Additionally, advancements in artificial intelligence have facilitated in-
novative applications in this field. For example, Serrano-Ruiz et al. [ 44] constructed the


=== PAGE 4 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 4 of 29
scheduling of an intelligent manufacturing system as a Markov Decision Process (MDP),
incorporating multi-objective optimization features, and used deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) to solve the job shop smart manufacturing scheduling problem. Zhang et al. [ 45]
proposed a deep reinforcement learning method based on a scheduling network tailored to
the multi-AGV scheduling environment, effectively solved the integrated scheduling prob-
lem in automated container terminals. However, these studies are not readily applicable to
the cruise ship manufacturing context, which demands extensive human decision-making
and manual labor, influenced by many factors.
In recent years, hyper-heuristic algorithms have garnered scholarly attention and have
been successfully applied to NP-hard problems, including the job shop scheduling problem
(JSP) [ 46], vehicle routing problem (VRP) [ 7], and nurse rostering problem (NRP) [ 47].
These algorithms effectively mitigate the impact of complex constraints on problem-solving
by searching the domain of low-level heuristic (LLH) rules when solving complex NP-hard
problems [ 48,49]. This approach offers distinct advantages in solving scheduling problems
with complex constraints. For instance, Guo et al. [ 50] focused on reconfigurable manufac-
turing systems, introduced a new dynamic flexible job shop scheduling problem (DFJSP-
RMC) and propose an improved genetic programming hyper-heuristic (GP-HH) method to
solve this problem. Zhang et al. [ 51] constructed a multi-objective fuzzy multitask-oriented
manufacturing service composition model considering urgent task arrivals and delayed
delivery times, aiming to optimize the manufacturing service combination problem in
cloud manufacturing environments, and designed a genetic hyper-heuristic algorithm with
variable chromosome lengths to achieve efficient solutions. Song and Lin [ 52] used a tree
structure to guide heuristic sequence coding for the distributed assembly permutation
flow-shop scheduling problem, which features a sequence-dependent setup. Lim et al. [ 53]
used simulated annealing (SA) as a framework to design hyper-heuristic algorithms with
machine assignment rules (MARs) and job-sequencing rules (JSRs) to solve the flexible job
shop scheduling problem.
Some other hyper-heuristic algorithms used in the literature are summarized in Table 1.
A review of these contributions reveals that most studies are limited to specific aspects and
do not effectively address the cruise PMCU logistics scheduling problem. In this paper,
a fuzzy multi-objective model is constructed for the first time, to solve the collaborative
scheduling of yard operations and transport equipment in PMCU logistics. This model
integrates two optimization objectives: minimizing the maximum fuzzy makespan and the
agreement index of due date. Furthermore, it accommodates complex constraints, including
bi-directional operations, multi-type tasks, and fuzzy transport times, which are inherent in
PMCU logistics. As a novelty, we propose a self-learning genetic hyper-heuristic algorithm
(GA-SLHH) in this paper to solve the scheduling problem. The proposed algorithm employs
dispatching rules as components of low-level heuristics (LLHs) and employs a genetic
algorithm as a high-level strategy (HLS) to optimize LLHs through selection, crossover,
mutation, and iterative processes. Additionally, it introduces probabilistic self-learning
models to sufficiently explore the relevance of dispatching rules. Finally, the validity of the
method is demonstrated through example validation.
Table 1. Summary of literature.
Papers Objectives Type Method
Sugianto and Kim [54] Delivery completion time Single-objectiveIterated variable neighborhood
search with rule-based heuristics
Song et al. [55] Completion time Single-objectiveHyper-heuristic based memetic
algorithm
Soleimanian Gharehchopogh
et al. [56]Distance Single-objectiveImproved farmland fertility
algorithm with hyper-heuristic
Li et al. [57] Total completion time Single-objectiveReinforcement learning-based
hyper-heuristic


=== PAGE 5 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 5 of 29
Table 1. Cont.
Papers Objectives Type Method
Duan et al. [58]Tardiness, idle energy
consumption, and
makespanMulti-objective Genetic programming hyper-heuristic
Mahmud et al. [59]Cost and sustainability
rewardsMulti-objective Self-adaptive hyper-heuristic
Cui et al. [60] Makespan and resources Multi-objectiveChoice-function-based
hyper-heuristic
3. PMCU Logistics Collaborative Scheduling Problem
3.1. Problem Description
The structure of the PMCU logistics collaborative scheduling problem studied in
this paper is illustrated in Figure 2. The logistics process involves multiple stages of
transportation, including assembled PMCU, PMCU awaiting transport, and outfitting
supplies requiring forklifts, delivery trucks, and cabin-lift, respectively. Among these, the
PMCUs awaiting transport requires the most diverse type of equipment. Initially, they are
first removed from the yard using forklifts and then placed onto delivery trucks, which
transport the PMCUs to the dock, where they are embarked by cabin lift. The assembled
PMCU is a cabin that has just completed the final stage of assembly on the assembly line
when it needs to be removed by a forklift and positioned appropriately in the PMCU yard.
Due to the large number and weight of outfitting supplies, cabin lifts are usually used
for embarkation in cruise ship production. Therefore, it is also necessary to consider the
occupation of the cabin lift by outfitting supplies during the final stage of logistics.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 31 
 
 Table 1. Summary of literature. 
Papers Objectives Type Method 
Sugianto and Kim [54] Delivery completion time Single-objective Iterated variable neig hborhood search with 
rule-based heuristics 
Song et al. [55] Completion time Single-obj ective Hyper-heuristic based memetic algorithm 
Soleimanian Ghare-
hchopogh et al. [56] Distance Single-objective Improved farmland fertility algorithm 
with hyper-heuristic 
Li et al. [57] Total comple tion time Single-objective Reinforcement learning-based hyper-heuris-
tic 
Duan et al. [58] Tardiness, idle en ergy consumption, 
and makespan Multi-objective Genetic pr ogramming hyper-heuristic 
Mahmud et al. [59] Cost and sustainability rewards Multi-objective Self-adaptive hyper-heuristic 
Cui et al. [60] Makespan and resources Multi- objective Choice-function -based hyper-heuristic 
3. PMCU Logistics Collaborative Scheduling Problem 
3.1. Problem Description 
The structure of the PMCU logistics collaborative scheduling problem studied in this 
paper is illustrated in Figure 2. The logistics process involves multiple stages of transpor-tation, including assembled PMCU, PMCU awaiting transport, and outfitting supplies re-
quiring forklifts, delivery trucks, and cabin-lift, respectively. Among these, the PMCUs 
awaiting transport requires the most diverse ty pe of equipment. Init ially, they are first 
removed from the yard using forklifts and then placed onto delivery trucks, which 
transport the PMCUs to the dock, where they are embarked by cabin lift. The assembled 
PMCU is a cabin that has just completed the final stage of assembly on the assembly line 
when it needs to be removed by a forklift an d positioned appropriately in the PMCU yard. 
Due to the large number and weight of outfitti ng supplies, cabin lifts are usually used for 
embarkation in cruise ship production. Therefore, it is also necessary to consider the oc-
cupation of the cabin lift by outfitting supplies during the final stage of logistics. 
 
Figure 2. PMCU logistics collaborative scheduling problem. 
The collaborative scheduling problem of PMCU logistics can be described as follows: 
There are 𝑁 different types of transportation tasks; for different transportation tasks 𝑖, 
the same or different number of transfer stages 𝑠 need to be transported. There are 𝑛 
equipment 𝑘 in each stage, and the processing time of different equipment 𝑘 for the 
same task 𝑖 is different. Each task can only be transported on transport equipment, each 
transport equipment can only handle one transportation task at a time. This problem can 
Figure 2. PMCU logistics collaborative scheduling problem.
The collaborative scheduling problem of PMCU logistics can be described as follows:
There are Ndifferent types of transportation tasks; for different transportation tasks i,
the same or different number of transfer stages sneed to be transported. There are n
equipment kin each stage, and the processing time of different equipment kfor the same
task iis different. Each task can only be transported on transport equipment, each transport
equipment can only handle one transportation task at a time. This problem can be classified
as a collaborative scheduling problem with bi-directional and multi-type task constraints,
making it more complex than typical collaborative scheduling problems.


=== PAGE 6 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 6 of 29
3.2. Environmental Conditions and Constraints
3.2.1. Uncertain Environment
The production and construction of ships fall within the large-scale equipment manu-
facturing industry. Compared with the industries that use a large number of automotive
equipment, the adoption of automated and standardized production is relatively limited.
Consequently, many production tasks need to be completed manually, resulting in signifi-
cant uncertainty regarding the processing times of various tasks. As a typical link in cruise
production, PMCU logistics also exhibits the characteristics of uncertain transportation
time and due date. This kind of task scheduling process with uncertain time is usually
described by fuzzy time. The transportation time is described by triangular fuzzy numbers
(TFNs), as shown in Figure 3.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 31 
 
 be classified as a collaborative scheduling problem with bi-directional and multi-type task 
constraints, making it more complex than typical collaborative scheduling problems. 
3.2. Environmental Conditions and Constraints 
3.2.1. Uncertain Environment 
The production and construction of ships fall within the large-scale equipment man-
ufacturing industry. Compared with the industri es that use a large number of automotive 
equipment, the adoption of automated and stan dardized production is relatively limited. 
Consequently, many production tasks need to be completed manually, resulting in signif-
icant uncertainty regarding the processing times of various tasks. As a typical link in 
cruise production, PMCU logistics also exhibi ts the characteristics of uncertain transpor-
tation time and due date. This kind of task scheduling process with uncertain time is usu-
ally described by fuzzy time. The transportation time is described by triangular fuzzy 
numbers (TFNs), as shown in Figure 3.  
In Figure 3, the vertical axis 𝜇 represents the membership function of fuzzy time, 
while the horizontal axis represents fuzzy time. In Figure 3a, where 𝑐௜௦ଵ,𝑐௜௦ଶ,𝑐௜௦ଷ denote the 
earliest, expected, and latest completion times of the transport task 𝑖 in stage 𝑠, respec-
tively. Regarding due dates, only the latest demand time is usually constrained in actual 
manufacturing. Therefore the fuzzy time descrip tion for the due date in [61] is adopted, 
as illustrated in Figure 3b. 
 
Figure 3. Fuzzy time. 
When solving the scheduling problem, it involves the operations of TFNs. For two 
TFNs 𝐶ଵ෪=( 𝑐 ଵଵ,𝑐ଵଶ,𝑐ଵଷ) and 𝐶ଶ෪=( 𝑐ଶଵ,𝑐ଶଶ,𝑐ଶଷ), the calculation and ranking criteria of fuzzy 
numbers are based on the approaches in [61], as shown in Table 2. 
Table 2. The operation rules of TFNs. 
Operations on Fuzzy Time Rules 
+ (𝑠𝑢𝑚)  𝐶ଵ෪+𝐶 ଶ෪=( 𝑐ଵଵ+𝑐ଶଵ,𝑐ଵଶ+𝑐ଶଶ,𝑐ଵଷ+𝑐ଶଷ) 
⋁ (𝑚𝑎𝑥)  𝐶ଵ ෪⋁ 𝐶 ଶ෪=( 𝑐ଵଵ ⋁ 𝑐ଶଵ,𝑐ଵଶ ⋁ 𝑐ଶଶ,𝑐ଵଷ ⋁ 𝑐ଶଷ) 
Ranking Criterion 1. 𝐶ଵ൫𝐶ሚ൯=  𝑐ଵ+2 𝑐ଶ+𝑐ଷ4⁄ 
Criterion 2. 𝐶ଶ൫𝐶ሚ൯=𝑐ଶ 
Criterion 3. 𝐶ଷ൫𝐶ሚ൯=𝑐ଷ−𝑐ଵ 
For the two TFNs 𝐶ଵ෪and 𝐶ଶ෪, the + (𝑠𝑢𝑚)  operation is the addition of the earliest, 
expected, and latest time, respectively. The ⋁ (𝑚𝑎𝑥)  operation takes the largest values of 
the earliest, expected, and latest time of th e two TFNs, respectively. The ranking operation 
is a sequential comparison process. For the TFNs 𝐶ଵ෪ and 𝐶ଶ෪, first compare 𝐶ଵ(𝐶ଵ෪) and 
𝐶ଵ(𝐶ଶ෪). If 𝐶ଵ(𝐶ଵ෪)>𝐶ଵ(𝐶ଶ෪), then 𝐶ଵ෪൐𝐶 ଶ෪. If 𝐶ଵ൫𝐶ଵ෪൯<𝐶 ଵ(𝐶ଶ෪), then 𝐶ଵ෪<𝐶 ଶ෪. If 𝐶ଵ൫𝐶ଵ෪൯=
Figure 3. Fuzzy time.
In Figure 3, the vertical axis µrepresents the membership function of fuzzy time, while
the horizontal axis represents fuzzy time. In Figure 3a, where c1
is,c2
is,c3
isdenote the earliest,
expected, and latest completion times of the transport task iin stage s, respectively. Regard-
ing due dates, only the latest demand time is usually constrained in actual manufacturing.
Therefore the fuzzy time description for the due date in [ 61] is adopted, as illustrated in
Figure 3b.
When solving the scheduling problem, it involves the operations of TFNs. For two
TFNs∼
C1= 
c1
1,c2
1,c3
1
and∼
C2= 
c1
2,c2
2,c3
2
, the calculation and ranking criteria of fuzzy
numbers are based on the approaches in [61], as shown in Table 2.
Table 2. The operation rules of TFNs.
Operations on Fuzzy Time Rules
+(sum)∼
C1+∼
C2= 
c1
1+c1
2,c2
1+c2
2,c3
1+c3
2
W(max)∼
C1W∼
C2= 
c1
1Wc1
2,c2
1Wc2
2,c3
1Wc3
2
RankingCriterion 1. C1∼
C
=c1+2c2+c3/4
Criterion 2. C2∼
C
=c2
Criterion 3. C3∼
C
=c3−c1
For the two TFNs∼
C1and∼
C2, the +(sum)operation is the addition of the earliest,
expected, and latest time, respectively. TheW(max)operation takes the largest values of
the earliest, expected, and latest time of the two TFNs, respectively. The ranking operation
is a sequential comparison process. For the TFNs∼
C1and∼
C2, first compare C1∼
C1
and


=== PAGE 7 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 7 of 29
C1∼
C2
. IfC1∼
C1
>C1∼
C2
, then∼
C1>∼
C2. IfC1∼
C1
<C1∼
C2
, then∼
C1<∼
C2. If
C1∼
C1
=C1∼
C2
,then we need to further compare the values of C2∼
C1
and C2∼
C2
.
Similarly, if C2∼
C1
=C2∼
C2
, then we need to further compare the values of C3∼
C1
and C3∼
C2
.
3.2.2. Transport Equipment Constraints
Equipment constraints in a scheduling problem are typically defined based on the
specificities of the actual problem environment. Within the PMCU logistics collaborative
scheduling problem, worker proficiency in operating transport vehicles and placing cabins
introduces variability in transportation times for different PMCUs by various types of
equipment. This also leads to the fact that the selection of transport equipment at different
stages of the PMCU will have a great impact on the final scheduling scheme. Compared to
traditional scheduling problems, the solution space and optimization of this problem are
considerably more complex.
In addition, during the final stage of logistics, due to the impact of the deck layout
established in the early stage of design, the target locations of different prefabricated
cabins are greatly different from the distance to different cabin lifts. Therefore, in the
actual environment, the designated cabin lift for embarking the cabins will be fixed and
restricted to ensure the smooth subsequent on-board installation. Therefore, when solving
the scheduling problem presented in this paper, it is necessary to consider the constraints
of specific task-processing equipment to ensure that the scheduling scheme meets the
actual requirements, and also puts forward higher requirements for algorithm design and
constraint processing.
3.3. Assumptions
Combined with the actual environment of logistics of cruise ship production, the
assumptions of PMCU logistics collaborative scheduling studied in this paper are shown
in Table 3.
Table 3. Assumptions of PMCU logistics collaborative scheduling problem.
Assumptions
1. All transportation equipment is available at time 0.
2. The release time of existing transport tasks is not 0.
3.There are a variety of types of transport tasks to be transported, and the transport
stages of each type of task are different.
4. There is no waiting time for the same transport equipment for adjacent tasks.
5.The buffer capacity between each stage is unlimited; that is, there is no blocking
constraint.
6.Once the transport task is carried out on transport equipment, no interruption is
allowed until the completion of the stage of transport.
7.The preparation time and return time of the equipment have been considered in task
transportation time.
8. The same equipment can only process one task at a time.
3.4. Mathematical Model
The relevant definitions and descriptions of symbols in the collaborative scheduling
model of PMCU logistics are shown in Table 4.


=== PAGE 8 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 8 of 29
Table 4. Definitions and descriptions of symbols.
Symbols Meaning
Indices Meaning
i,jTask index i,j,i,j=1, 2, . . . , n;
nis the total number of transportation tasks in PMCU logistics
sTransport stage index s,s=1, 2, . . . , ns;
nsis the total number of stages in PMCU logistics
kEquipment index k,k=1, 2, . . . , nm;
nmis the total amount of equipment in PMCU logistics
Parameters Meaning
∼
DiThe fuzzy due date of task i
∼
PiksThe fuzzy time of task irequired for transportation by equipment kin stage s
∼
RiThe fuzzy release time of task i
Yis Binary parameter. If task igoes through the stage s,Yis=1; otherwise, Yis=0
M Large positive number
Variables Meaning
∼
CisThe fuzzy completion time of stage sof task i
∼
BisThe fuzzy beginning time of stage sof task i
∼
CiThe fuzzy completion time of the last stage of task i
∼
CmaxThe maximum fuzzy makespan of PMCU logistics
AI The average fuzzy due date agreement index of PMCU logistics
Xiks If task iis transported by equipment kin stage s,Xiks=1; otherwise, Xiks=0
ZijksIf tasks iand jare transported by equipment kin stage s, and iis transported before j,
Zijks=1; otherwise, Zijks= 0
For cruise ship production processes characterized by complex constraints, manufac-
turers often require not only efficient production but also execution as closely as possible to
the established plan. Therefore, for the collaborative scheduling problem of PMCU logistics
studied in this paper, the optimization objectives should include minimizing the maximum
fuzzy makespan and maximizing the average “Agreement Index” (AI) for each task relative
to the planned due date. Specifically, these objectives are as follow:
min f 1=∼
Cmax=max∼
Ci (1)
max f 2=AI=1
nn
∑
i=1AIi (2)
where AIirepresents the agreement index of completion time and planned due date of task
i, as shown in Figure 4.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 31 
 
 𝑘 Equipment index 𝑘, 𝑘 = 1,2, … , 𝑛 ௠; 
𝑛௠ is the total amount of eq uipment in PMCU logistics  
Parameters Meaning 
𝐷ప෩ The fuzzy due date of task 𝑖 
𝑃ప௞௦෪ The fuzzy time of task 𝑖 required for transportation by equipment 𝑘 in stage 𝑠 
𝑅ప෩ The fuzzy release time of task 𝑖 
𝑌௜௦ Binary parameter. If task 𝑖 goes through the stage 𝑠, 𝑌 ௜௦=1; otherwise, 𝑌௜௦=0 
𝑀 Large positive number 
Variables Meaning 
𝐶ప௦෪ The fuzzy completion time of stage 𝑠 of task 𝑖 
𝐵ప௦෪ The fuzzy beginning time of stage 𝑠 of task 𝑖 
𝐶ప෩ The fuzzy completion time of  the last stage of task 𝑖 
𝐶௠௔௫ ෫  The maximum fuzzy makespan of PMCU logistics 
𝐴𝐼തതത The average fuzzy due date agr eement index of PMCU logistics 
𝑋௜௞௦ If task 𝑖 is transported by equipment 𝑘 in stage 𝑠, 𝑋௜௞௦=1; otherwise, 𝑋௜௞௦=0 
𝑍௜௝௞௦ If tasks 𝑖 and 𝑗 are transported by equipment 𝑘 in stage 𝑠, and 𝑖 is transported before 𝑗, 𝑍 ௜௝௞௦ =1; oth-
erwise, 𝑍௜௝௞௦=0 
For cruise ship production processes characterized by complex constraints, manufac-
turers often require not only efficient production but also execution as closely as possible 
to the established plan. Therefore, for the collaborative scheduling problem of PMCU lo-
gistics studied in this paper, the optimization objectives should include minimizing the maximum fuzzy makespan and maximizing the average “Agreement Index” (AI) for each 
task relative to the planned due date. Spec ifically, these objectives are as follow: 
𝑚𝑖𝑛 
𝑓ଵ=𝐶 ௠௔௫ ෫ =m a x 𝐶 ప෩ (1)
𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑓ଶ=𝐴𝐼=1
𝑛෍𝐴𝐼௜௡
௜ୀଵ (2)
where 𝐴𝐼௜ represents the agreement index of completion time and planned due date of 
task 𝑖, as shown in Figure 4. 
1.0
 
Figure 4. Agreement Index. 
Then 𝐴𝐼௜ is calculated as follows: 
𝐴𝐼௜=𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎(𝐶 ప෩∩𝐷 ప෩)
𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑎(𝐶 ప෩) (3)
To facilitate optimization and reduce the amount of computation, and to facilitate the 
scheduler to generate corresponding schedu ling schemes based on varying conditions, 
we assign different weights to the two object ive functions and combine them into a single 
objective function: 
Figure 4. Agreement Index.


=== PAGE 9 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 9 of 29
Then AIiis calculated as follows:
AIi=area∼
Ci∩∼
Di
area∼
Ci (3)
To facilitate optimization and reduce the amount of computation, and to facilitate the
scheduler to generate corresponding scheduling schemes based on varying conditions, we
assign different weights to the two objective functions and combine them into a single
objective function:
F=ω1·f1+ω2·1/f2(4)
ω1+ω2=1 (5)
In order to avoid the impact on the objective function due to the inconsistency of the
two optimization objectives changing drastically, the optimization objective f1is normalized
according to Equation (6).
N(f1)=f1−(f1)min
(f1)max−(f1)min(6)
In Equation (6), (f1)maxand(f1)minrepresent the upper and lower bounds of the
objective f1. And the objective function is shown as Equation (7).
F=ω1·N(f1)+ω2·(1/f2) (7)
The constraints of the problem model include:
∼
Cis=(1−Yis)·∼
Cis−1+Yis· 
∼
Bis+nm
∑
k=1Xiks·∼
Piks!
(8)
∼
Cis≤∼
Bis+1 (9)
∼
Bi1≥∼
Ri (10)
nm
∑
k=1Xiks=1 (11)
∼
Bis≥∼
Cjs−Zijks·M
·Yis·Yjs (12)
∼
Cis,∼
Bis≥0 (13)
Equation (8) defines the completion time of each task at each stage, and, if task idoes
not go through the transportation stage s, then its completion time of task iat that stage is
equal to the completion time of the previous stage that it went through. Equation (9) ensures
that each task imust complete the previous before it can start the next stage. Equation (10)
represents that task iis released for transportation. Equation (11) indicates that each task
can only be processed on one transport equipment at the same time. Equations (12) and
(13) describe the priority constraints of tasks on the same equipment in the same stage.
Equation (12) indicates that the start time of the equipment kof task iin stage smust be
after the completion time of task j. Equation (13) represents the fuzzy makespan and the
fuzzy beginning time of task imust be greater than zero.
4. Self-Learning Hyper-Heuristic Algorithm Based on Genetic Algorithm
4.1. Hyper-Heuristic Algorithm Based on Genetic Algorithm (GA-HH)
The genetic algorithm (GA) is an algorithm based on the principles of evolutionary
theory, first proposed by American scholar John Holland in 1975 [ 62]. Its basic idea is


=== PAGE 10 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 10 of 29
to find a high-quality feasible solution by modeling the process of biological evolution
observed in nature. The core of the genetic algorithm begins with an initial population and
uses genetic operations to generate new populations iteratively to search for an acceptable
solution suitable for the specific problem at hand. The GA usually includes population
initialization, selection, crossover, and mutation operations. The execution flowchart of
genetic algorithm is shown in Figure 5.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 31 
 
  
Figure 5. Flowchart of genetic algorithm. 
In most studies, genetic algorithms are used as a tool for the solution, usually directly 
for generating combinatorial solutions in la rge batches, and then improving convergence 
accuracy and speed by enhancing the quality of the initial population or improving the 
genetic manipulation methods. However, in the complex environment of real scheduling 
problems, genetic operations us ually produce a significant amount of infeasible solutions, 
requiring a large number of solution judgments and repair operations on the offspring 
population, which consumes a large amount of time and cost. Compared with traditional 
genetic algorithms, hyper-heuris tics do not directly change the combinatorial scheme but 
manipulates the set of LLHs through genetic operations to change the combinatorial scheme, which has a higher flexibility and applicability to complex problems. Conse-
quently, the positions of the superior individuals in the population do not represent the 
direction of optimization. It is necessary to  avoid the mutual influence of individuals 
within the same generation population, which will cause disturbance to the iteration op-
timization. Compared with other meta-heuristic s, the GA can directly pass the better in-
dividual information of the parent to the offspring, which is more suitable as HLS. 
In this paper, the genetic algorithm is not directly used to generate and manipulate 
the scheduling scheme, but as an HLS used to control the LLHs. A new set of LLHs is 
generated by genetic operatio n iteratively, and then the scheduling scheme is subse-
quently calculated based on the LLHs. Finally,  the best-fit feasible LLH that meets the 
current problem is generated to achieve the high-quality feasible solution for the schedul-
ing problem. 
4.2. Low-Level Heuristics 
In hyper-heuristic algorithms, the search sp ace of HLS is composed of LLHs that con-
form to the constraints of the problem. In some  of the hyper-heuristic algorithm studies, the 
LLH is a neighborhood operator  such as swap and insert, wh ich increases the diversity of 
the solution space through neighborhood ch anges to obtain a higher-quality solution 
[46,51,63]. It is still essentially a schedulin g scheme that solves the problem directly. 
Unlike the neighborhood operator, the ge netic hyper-heuristic algorithm proposed 
in this paper will use a combination of 14 di spatching rules that match the specific char-
acteristics of the problem to construct the LLH, transforming the search space of the 
Figure 5. Flowchart of genetic algorithm.
In most studies, genetic algorithms are used as a tool for the solution, usually directly
for generating combinatorial solutions in large batches, and then improving convergence
accuracy and speed by enhancing the quality of the initial population or improving the
genetic manipulation methods. However, in the complex environment of real scheduling
problems, genetic operations usually produce a significant amount of infeasible solutions,
requiring a large number of solution judgments and repair operations on the offspring
population, which consumes a large amount of time and cost. Compared with traditional
genetic algorithms, hyper-heuristics do not directly change the combinatorial scheme
but manipulates the set of LLHs through genetic operations to change the combinatorial
scheme, which has a higher flexibility and applicability to complex problems. Consequently,
the positions of the superior individuals in the population do not represent the direction
of optimization. It is necessary to avoid the mutual influence of individuals within the
same generation population, which will cause disturbance to the iteration optimization.
Compared with other meta-heuristics, the GA can directly pass the better individual
information of the parent to the offspring, which is more suitable as HLS.
In this paper, the genetic algorithm is not directly used to generate and manipulate the
scheduling scheme, but as an HLS used to control the LLHs. A new set of LLHs is generated
by genetic operation iteratively, and then the scheduling scheme is subsequently calculated


=== PAGE 11 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 11 of 29
based on the LLHs. Finally, the best-fit feasible LLH that meets the current problem is
generated to achieve the high-quality feasible solution for the scheduling problem.
4.2. Low-Level Heuristics
In hyper-heuristic algorithms, the search space of HLS is composed of LLHs that
conform to the constraints of the problem. In some of the hyper-heuristic algorithm
studies, the LLH is a neighborhood operator such as swap and insert, which increases the
diversity of the solution space through neighborhood changes to obtain a higher-quality
solution [ 46,51,63]. It is still essentially a scheduling scheme that solves the problem directly.
Unlike the neighborhood operator, the genetic hyper-heuristic algorithm proposed in
this paper will use a combination of 14 dispatching rules that match the specific characteris-
tics of the problem to construct the LLH, transforming the search space of the algorithm
into a rule space in which genetic operations are used to find the best-fit rules. Dispatching
rules are used as LLHs because of their successful application in scheduling problems,
on the one hand, and also because they are more suitable for manual decision-making in
actual environments. In addition, dispatching rules as LLHs have better extensibility and
flexibility, and the corresponding rules can be added or deleted according to the actual
conditions without affecting the structure of the HLS structure. The 14 dispatching rules
used in this paper are shown in Table 5.
Table 5. Dispatching rules.
No. Dispatching Rule Description
1 FIFO First in, first out
2 SPT Shortest processing time
3 LPT Longest processing time
4 LWKR Least work remaining
5 MWKR Most work remaining
6 SPTswm [64] Shortest average processing time
7 LPTswm [64] Longest average processing time
8 SDT Shortest processing time as a percentage of total time
9 LDT Longest processing time as a percentage of total time
10 SDR Shortest processing time as a percentage of the remaining time
11 LDR Longest processing time as a percentage of the remaining time
12 FRO Fewest remaining operations
13 LRO Most remaining operations
14 Random Random selection
Typically, a comprehensive scheduling solution for a scheduling problem can be found
directly by using only one dispatching rule, but the result of using the same dispatching
rule for all decision points in a scheduling problem may not be optimal. The use of a
combination of multiple dispatching rules has been shown to provide a better solution
compared to using a single rule [ 65], and we will obtain a sequence of best-fit feasible hybrid
dispatching rules that satisfy the problem through continuous iterations of a high-level
genetic algorithm.
After determining the composition of the LLHs, it is then necessary to specify how the
scheduling scheme can be solved from the LLHs. In dispatching rule-based scheduling, the
equipment corresponding to each task at different stages of the whole process is usually
determined based on a certain scheduling rule to form a complete scheduling scheme. For
the problem studied in this paper, a complete scheduling program should cover all decision
points, including all tasks of PMCUs and outfitting supplies, as well as the equipment
arrangement for each task at each stage. The solving process of the scheduling scheme
used in this paper is shown in Table 6.


=== PAGE 12 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 12 of 29
Table 6. LLH-solving process of the scheme.
Step Description
Step 1 Parameters initialization ,transport stage s=1,dispatching rule number n=1.
Step 2Determine the set Ts,which is the set of tasks that need to be processed in stage s
and the set of equipment.
Step 3 Select the earliest idle equipment from the set of idle equipment.
Step 4Select the n−thdispatching rule in LLH and determine the current task ito be
processed according to the dispatching rule.
Step 5Updating the completion time of task iand the earliest idle time of equipment k,
n=n+1.
Step 6If set Tsis empty, and the current stage sis not the last stage, s=s+1 and
execute Step 2. Otherwise, execute Step 7.
Step 7Generate a scheduling scheme. Calculate the fitness corresponding to the current
scheduling scheme based on the fitness calculation function and pass it to
the HLS.
4.3. High-Level Strategy
In this paper, we employ the genetic algorithm as a high-level heuristic strategy, which
is the same as the traditional genetic algorithm framework. This framework comprises four
parts: population initialization, selection, crossover, and mutation.
In addition to the basic genetic operations, the encoding and decoding mechanisms
need to be designed. In genetic algorithms, the encoding and decoding mechanisms usu-
ally need to be designed to combine with the specific problem to be solved, while, in the
GA-SLHH, the encoding and decoding mechanisms also have the function of informa-
tion transfer between LLHs and HLS. Therefore, the design of encoding and decoding
mechanisms needs to fully consider the problem characteristics and the solution process.
1. Encoding and decoding
In the GA-HH, the encoding will be represented as a floating-point number between
0 and 1. A chromosome represents an LLH containing multiple hybrid dispatching rules.
And concerning the way the float numbers are mapped to dispatching rules, we use a
roulette wheel approach; i.e., each dispatch rule initially has the same probability of taking
a value—for the value corresponding to a gene position on a chromosome, we obtain the
integer encoding of the dispatching rule corresponding to that floating point number by
roulette and then generate an LLH to realize the decoding.
The encoding and decoding are illustrated using a problem with four tasks to be trans-
ported, each requiring three stages as an example. For this problem, five dispatching rules
can be used to generate LLHs, and, in the initial state, all five dispatching rules are taken
with an equal probability of 0.2. In high-level genetic algorithm operations, the structure of
a chromosome and the LLH it maps to are shown in Figure 6. In the GA-SLHH chromo-
somes, a floating-point number at a locus represents a mapping probability, and the interval
in which this probability lies determines the dispatching rule. When the chromosome is
decoded, LLHs consisting of dispatching rules for each decision point are also generated. It
can be seen that the GA-SLHH does not directly search the scheduling scheme solution
space but optimizes the scheduling scheme by optimizing the dispatching rule for executing
the scheduling, and does not need to directly solve the complex scheduling problem.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 31 
 
 Step 5 Updating the completion time of task 𝑖 and the earliest idle time of equipment 
𝑘,𝑛=𝑛+1 . 
Step 6 If set 𝑇௦ is empty, and the current stage 𝑠 is not the last stage, 𝑠=𝑠+1  and exe-
cute Step 2. Otherwise, execute Step 7. 
Step 7 Generate a scheduling scheme. Calculate the fitness corresponding to the current 
scheduling scheme based on the fitness calc ulation function and pass it to the 
HLS. 
4.3. High-Level Strategy 
In this paper, we employ the genetic algorithm as a high-level heuristic strategy, 
which is the same as the traditional genetic algorithm framework. This framework com-prises four parts: population initialization, selection, crossover, and mutation. 
In addition to the basic genetic operations, the encoding and decoding mechanisms 
need to be designed. In genetic algorithms , the encoding and decoding mechanisms usu-
ally need to be designed to combine with the specific problem to be solved, while, in the 
GA-SLHH, the encoding and decoding mechanis ms also have the function of information 
transfer between LLHs and HLS. Therefore, th e design of encoding and decoding mecha-
nisms needs to fully consider the problem characteristics and the solution process. 
1. Encoding and decoding 
In the GA-HH, the encoding will be repres ented as a floating-point number between 
0 and 1. A chromosome represents an LLH containing multiple hybrid dispatching rules. And concerning the way the float numbers are mapped to dispatching rules, we use a 
roulette wheel approach; i.e., each dispatch rule  initially has the same probability of taking 
a value—for the value corresponding to a gene  position on a chromosome, we obtain the 
integer encoding of the dispatching rule corresponding to that floating point number by 
roulette and then generate an LLH to realize the decoding.  
The encoding and decoding are illustrated using a problem with four tasks to be 
transported, each requiring three stages as an  example. For this problem, five dispatching 
rules can be used to generate LLHs, and, in the initial state, all five dispatching rules are taken with an equal probability of 0.2. In high-level genetic algorithm operations, the 
structure of a chromosome and the LLH it maps to are shown in Figure 6. In the GA-SLHH 
chromosomes, a floating-point number at a locus represents a mapping probability, and 
the interval in which this probability lies de termines the dispatching rule. When the chro-
mosome is decoded, LLHs consisting of dispat ching rules for each decision point are also 
generated. It can be seen that the GA-SLHH does not directly search the scheduling 
scheme solution space but optimizes the sche duling scheme by optimizing the dispatch-
ing rule for executing the scheduling, and do es not need to directly solve the complex 
scheduling problem. 
0.0930.6580.4100.3150.2210.9580.6840.049 0.6280.7960.8320.146
h1 h2 h4 h4 h5 h1 h4 h3 h2 h5 h4 h1h11
0.40.8
0.60.2
h2
h3h4h5
0.628GA-HH 
chromosome
LLH consisting
of dispatching rules
 
Figure 6. Chromosome and dispatching rules mapping.  
We used 14 dispatching rules as components  for generating the LLHs, with each heu-
ristic rule having the same initial probabilit y distribution, thus ensuring that the proba-
bility of choosing each of the 14 scheduling rules is the same at each decision point in the 
HLS. The length of each chromosome length is designed to ensure that the number of 
generated dispatching rules is equal to the number of decision points to ensure that all 
Figure 6. Chromosome and dispatching rules mapping.


=== PAGE 13 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 13 of 29
We used 14 dispatching rules as components for generating the LLHs, with each
heuristic rule having the same initial probability distribution, thus ensuring that the prob-
ability of choosing each of the 14 scheduling rules is the same at each decision point in
the HLS. The length of each chromosome length is designed to ensure that the number of
generated dispatching rules is equal to the number of decision points to ensure that all
tasks have a dispatching rule that can satisfy the appropriate assignment of them to the
transportation equipment of the corresponding stage for processing at the stage they need
to go through.
2. Population initialization
A complete chromosome should cover all decision points in the scheduling problem
and decode the heuristic rules to generate a comprehensive scheduling solution by realizing
the probability of roulette. In order to ensure that all dispatching rules can be selected
with equal probability, we use a random population initialization strategy that obeys a
0–1 uniform distribution to randomly generate a sequence of random numbers that meets
the number of decision points in the problem, forming a chromosome to generate the initial
population.
3. Selection
In genetic algorithms, solutions with higher fitness are more likely to be used for
selection. Therefore, roulette wheel selection is used at this stage to measure the probability
that an individual will make it to the next generation based on its fitness in the population.
The probability of roulette selection is calculated as shown in Equation (14), where f its
denotes the fitness of the current individual.
P(s) =f its
∑n
i=1f iti(14)
4. Crossover
Genetic algorithms maintain population diversity through crossover operators, which
usually need to be designed for different problems. The general crossover operator in
the basic genetic algorithm generates two or more long subsequences in the offspring
individuals. In the hyper-heuristic proposed in this paper, the HLS operates directly on
a set of LLHs rather than on the solution space of the scheme. Consequently, different
dispatching rules may lead to the same scheme in the decoding computation, leading to
a lack of population diversity. The uniform crossover operator can reduce the length of
offspring individual subsequences, increase the number of subsequences, and improve
the diversity of offspring population. Thus, we used the uniform crossover to ensure that
we maximize diversity in the LLH generation scheduling scheme within the population.
During the crossover operation, we generate a 0–1 sequence of the same length as the
chromosome. If the value on the corresponding position p is 0, the parent does not perform
crossover at position p, and, conversely, if the value is 1, the parent performs crossover.
The uniform crossover operator is shown in Figure 7.
5. Mutation
Similar to the crossover operator, mutation is performed only on the LLH sequence
made up of the scheduling rules, without taking into account the relevant constraints
present in the actual scheduling environment. Since the PMCU logistics process includes
three stages, providing perturbation for each stage can effectively improve the exploration
and exploitation capability of the algorithm compared to the conventional mutation opera-
tor. In this study, the mutation operator in the HLS will add perturbations at each stage
when executing the decision, so a multi-point mutation, split by stage, will be used, as
shown in Figure 8.
6. Iteration


=== PAGE 14 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 14 of 29
The LLH sequences computed by HLS, along with selection, crossover, and mutation
operators, will carry information about the current problem solution of the parent to the
next-generation population. This information is subsequently decoded and mapped to
generate a new complete scheduling scheme. Repeat the above process and iterate the
computation until the termination condition is reached to output the feasible solution. In
order to improve the convergence speed, the LLHs that do not enhance the population
fitness will be ignored when iterating for each generation of the population. In addition, in
order to explore the potential relevance between decisions, a self-learning mechanism will
be introduced at each generation of the population iteration, and the relevant introduction
about the self-learning mechanism will be provided in Section 4.4.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 31 
 
 tasks have a dispatching rule that can satisfy the appropriate assignment of them to the 
transportation equipment of the corresponding stage for processing at the stage they need 
to go through. 
2. Population initialization 
A complete chromosome should cover all decision points in the scheduling problem 
and decode the heuristic rules to generate a comprehensive scheduling solution by real-
izing the probability of roulette. In order to ensure that all dispatching rules can be se-
lected with equal probability, we use a random population initialization strategy that obeys a 0–1 uniform distributi on to randomly generate a sequence of random numbers 
that meets the number of decision points in the problem, forming a chromosome to gen-
erate the initial population. 
3. Selection 
In genetic algorithms, solutions with higher fitness are more likely to be used for 
selection. Therefore, roulette wheel selection is used at this stage to measure the probabil-
ity that an individual will make it to the next generation based on its fitness in the popu-
lation. The probability of roulette selection is calculated as shown in Equation (14), where 
𝑓𝑖𝑡 ௦ denotes the fitness of the current individual. 
𝑃(𝑠) =𝑓𝑖𝑡௦
∑ 𝑓𝑖𝑡௜௡
௜ୀଵ (14)
4. Crossover 
Genetic algorithms maintain population diversity through crossover operators, 
which usually need to be designed for different problems. The general crossover operator 
in the basic genetic algorithm generates two or more long subsequences in the offspring individuals. In the hyper-heuristic proposed in  this paper, the HLS operates directly on a 
set of LLHs rather than on the solution space of the scheme. Consequently, different dis-
patching rules may lead to the same scheme in the decoding computation, leading to a 
lack of population diversity. The uniform crossover operator can reduce the length of off-
spring individual subsequences, increase th e number of subsequences, and improve the 
diversity of offspring population. Thus, we used the uniform crossover to ensure that we 
maximize diversity in the LLH generation scheduli ng scheme within the population. Dur-
ing the crossover operation, we generate a 0–1 sequence of the same length as the chro-
mosome. If the value on the corresponding posi tion p is 0, the parent does not perform 
crossover at position p, and, conversely, if th e value is 1, the parent performs crossover. 
The uniform crossover operator is shown in Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7. Uniform crossover operator. 
5. Mutation 
Figure 7. Uniform crossover operator.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 31 
 
 Similar to the crossover operator, mutation  is performed only on the LLH sequence 
made up of the scheduling rules, without taking into account the relevant constraints pre-
sent in the actual scheduling environment.  Since the PMCU logistics process includes 
three stages, providing perturbation for each stage can effectively improve the exploration 
and exploitation capability of the algorithm compared to the conventional mutation op-
erator. In this study, the mutation operator in the HLS will add perturbations at each stage 
when executing the decision, so  a multi-point mutation, split by stage, will be used, as 
shown in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. Mutation operator. 
6. Iteration 
The LLH sequences computed by HLS, along with selection, crossover, and mutation 
operators, will carry information about the curre nt problem solution of the parent to the 
next-generation population. This information is subsequently decoded and mapped to 
generate a new complete scheduling scheme . Repeat the above process and iterate the 
computation until the termination condition is reached to output the feasible solution. In 
order to improve the convergence speed, th e LLHs that do not enhance the population 
fitness will be ignored when iterating for each  generation of the po pulation. In addition, 
in order to explore the potential relevance between decisions, a self-learning mechanism 
will be introduced at each generation of the population iteration, and the relevant intro-
duction about the self-learning mechanism will be provided in Section 4.4. 
4.4. Self-Learning Mechanism 
In this paper, when HLS operates on LLH, multiple dispatching rules may corre-
spond to the same scheduling action. The GA mainly maintains population diversity 
through the crossover operator; however, the individual gene values remain unchanged, 
resulting in the corresponding dispatching rule is unchanged. Simply increasing the mu-
tation probability or the number of mutated genes does not effectively solve this problem. 
It is necessary to design an adjustment sc heme for mapping probability based on the spe-
cific problem. 
In actual PMCU logistics equipment scheduling , it is often the case that the decision 
made by the decision-maker at a previous decision point has a potential impact on suc-
ceeding decisions and even on the final scheme. Reflected in the computation is also rthe potential relevance of adjacent dispatching rules for the generation of the problem solu-tion. Therefore, we propose th at the mapping probability of a dispatching rule in LLHs is 
variable, and the effects of component adjacenc ies needs to be considered when determin-
ing the probability of a certain dispatching rule takes a value at a certain position. The use of genetic algorithms in HLS alone cannot explore the potential influence between deci-
sion actions, nor can it completely and accurately evaluate whether the generated sched-
uling scheme is entirely applicable to the cu rrent problem environment. At this point, rel-
evant knowledge can be obtained from scheduling solutions that have already been iden-
tified in previous evaluations as more suit able for the current problem environment, and 
Figure 8. Mutation operator.
4.4. Self-Learning Mechanism
In this paper, when HLS operates on LLH, multiple dispatching rules may correspond
to the same scheduling action. The GA mainly maintains population diversity through the
crossover operator; however, the individual gene values remain unchanged, resulting in the
corresponding dispatching rule is unchanged. Simply increasing the mutation probability
or the number of mutated genes does not effectively solve this problem. It is necessary to
design an adjustment scheme for mapping probability based on the specific problem.
In actual PMCU logistics equipment scheduling, it is often the case that the decision
made by the decision-maker at a previous decision point has a potential impact on suc-
ceeding decisions and even on the final scheme. Reflected in the computation is also rthe
potential relevance of adjacent dispatching rules for the generation of the problem solution.
Therefore, we propose that the mapping probability of a dispatching rule in LLHs is vari-
able, and the effects of component adjacencies needs to be considered when determining
the probability of a certain dispatching rule takes a value at a certain position. The use of
genetic algorithms in HLS alone cannot explore the potential influence between decision
actions, nor can it completely and accurately evaluate whether the generated scheduling
scheme is entirely applicable to the current problem environment. At this point, relevant


=== PAGE 15 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 15 of 29
knowledge can be obtained from scheduling solutions that have already been identified
in previous evaluations as more suitable for the current problem environment, and the
algorithm learns the knowledge to adjust the subsequent search scope and optimization
direction to provide decision-making paradigm support for the enterprise.
For the statistical analysis and computation of knowledge, we use the knowledge and
its statistics derived from the probabilistic learning model presented in the study by Shao
et al. [66], as shown in Equation (15).
µh,q=1
2 
ρh,q
∑r∈Ωqρr,q+ηh′,h
∑r∈Ωqηh′,r!
(15)
In Equation (15), ρh,qrepresents the number of times the h-th dispatching rule occurs
before (and including) position qin the current population. ηh′,hrepresents the number of
times the h-th dispatching rule component occurs immediately after the h′-th dispatching
rule in the current population. µh,qrepresents the probability of selecting the h-th schedul-
ing rule at position q.Ωqis the set of dispatching rules that can be assigned at position
q. In the GA-SLHH proposed in this paper, LLH is a sequence consisting of a classical
dispatching rule. The specific dispatching rule is determined by the probability of each
position on the chromosome (as shown in Figure 6). The self-learning model updates the
probability ranges by counting the occurrences of a dispatching occurs at position qand the
neighboring dispatching rules for all individuals during the population iteration (i.e., µh,q).
Knowledge is usually summarized by generalizing existing information. We consid-
ered that, in the iterative optimization process of hyper-heuristic algorithms, knowledge
consists of two parts: explorative knowledge and accumulative knowledge. Explorative
knowledge refers to the knowledge obtained from the superior individuals in the current
population, while accumulative knowledge refers to the knowledge obtained from the set
of historically best-fit individuals as the iterative process proceeds, and the combination
of these two types of knowledge guide the algorithm’s subsequent optimization direction
together. We designed a self-learning mechanism to guide the hyper-heuristic algorithm,
as shown from Equations (16)–(18).
µh,q=Iter
maxIterµh,qhis+maxIter −Iter
maxIterµh,qcur(16)
µh,qhis=1
2 
ρh,qhis
∑r∈Ωqρr,qhis+ηh′,hhis
∑r∈Ωqηh′,rhis!
(17)
µh,qcur=1
2 
ρh,qcur
∑r∈Ωqρr,qcur+ηh′,hcur
∑r∈Ωqηh′,rcur!
(18)
In Equation (16), µh,qhisrepresents the accumulative knowledge, which is computed
from the set consisting of historically best-fit individuals iteratively generated by the
algorithm. This reflects the probability that the h-th dispatching rule occurs at position q
from the historically best-fit population. And µh,qcurrepresents the exploratory knowledge,
computed from the summarization of the better individuals in the current population,
which is the probability that the h-th dispatching rule occurs at position qfrom the current
population. maxIter and Iterdenote the maximum number of iterations and the current
number of iterations of the algorithm, respectively. It means that, at the beginning of the
hyper-heuristic algorithm, without accumulating enough historical excellent experience to
learn, the algorithm will tend to learn from the acquired exploratory knowledge, and, with
the accumulation of knowledge and experience progressively, the algorithm will tend to
learn more and more from the accumulated knowledge. This is also consistent with the
tendency of enterprise managers to make production schemes regarding experience.


=== PAGE 16 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 16 of 29
4.5. GA-SLHH Flow
We believe that self-learning mechanisms should be integrated into the iterative
process of HLS to serve as a guide for the search direction of the algorithm. At the same
time, the genetic algorithm should also retain its “survival of the fittest” feature to ensure
that each iteration explores the optimization direction with a certain probability.
Therefore, we decided to use both approaches to collaboratively drive the algorithm
iterations, with each approach generating half the number of LLH individuals in the
new population. The main difference is that the individuals selected through the genetic
algorithm are converted to LLH using roulette probabilities based on the initial state
probabilities, meaning that all dispatching rules have equal probabilities. The individuals
generated through the self-learning mechanism are converted to LLH using the probabilities
calculated in Equations (16)–(18).
The flowchart of the GA-SLHH is shown in Figure 9. And the pseudo-code for the
GA-SLHH is provided in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1: GA-SLHH
Input:
ps: Population size, pc: Crossover rate, pm: Mutation rate, maxIter : Maximum number of
iterations
Output:
High-quality feasible scheme
Begin
i=1;
Initialize P(i)// Randomly generate an initial population that satisfies a (0,1) uniform
distribution
P(i+1)=∅
f=zeros(PS, 1)
while (i≤maxIter )do
forj=1 to psdo
Evaluate the fitness of population P(i); // Fitness evaluation based on Equations (1)~(7);
endfor
forj=1 to psdo
Selection of individual parents based on fitness f;
ifrand<pc
Perform crossover operation to generate offspring P(i+1)individuals;
else
Directly generate offspring P(i+1)individuals;
endif
endfor
forj=1 to psdo
ifrand<pm
Perform multi −point mutation operation to individuals in P(i+1);
endif
endfor
Divide the population P(i+1)into two sub-populations sub-population I and
sub-population II with the same number of individuals;
forj=1 to ps/2do
Convert individuals in sub-population I to LLHs using initial mapping probabilities;
Convert individuals in sub-population II to LLHs using self-learning mapping
probabilities;
endfor
Fitness evaluation of population P(i+1);
P(i)=P(i+1);
i=i+1;
endwhile
end


=== PAGE 17 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 17 of 29
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 31 
 
 the genetic algorithm should also retain its “sur vival of the fittest” feature to ensure that 
each iteration explores th e optimization direction wi th a certain probability. 
Therefore, we decided to use both approach es to collaboratively drive the algorithm 
iterations, with each approach generating ha lf the number of LLH individuals in the new 
population. The main difference is that the individuals selected through the genetic algo-
rithm are converted to LLH using roulette pr obabilities based on the initial state proba-
bilities, meaning that all dispatching rules ha ve equal probabilities. The individuals gen-
erated through the self-learning mechanism are converted to LLH using the probabilities calculated in Equations (16) –(18).  
The flowchart of the GA-SLHH is shown in Figure 9. And the pseudo-code for the 
GA-SLHH is provided in Algorithm 1. 
 
Figure 9. GA-SLHH flowchart. 
Algorithm 1:  GA-SLHH 
Input:  
𝑝𝑠: Population size, 𝑝௖: Crossover rate, 𝑝௠: Mutation rate, 𝑚𝑎𝑥𝐼𝑡𝑒𝑟 : Maximum num-
ber of iterations  
Output: High-quality feasible scheme Begin 𝑖 = 1 ; 
Initialize 𝑃(𝑖) // Randomly generate an initial population that satisfies a (0,1) uniform 
distribution 
Figure 9. GA-SLHH flowchart.
5. Computational Experiments
To assess the applicability and performance of the algorithm proposed in this study,
we designed two groups of numerical experiments. All experimental verification programs
were executed on a computer equipped with an AMD Ryzen 5 4600H 3.00 GHz processor
and 16 G of running memory.
(1) Performance testing. The GA-SLHH, along with the commonly used meta-heuristic
algorithms GA and PSO, and the commonly used scheduling rules FIFO, SPT, MWKR,
and FRO are used to perform computations under the same instances of fuzzy scheduling
problems, respectively, which, in turn, evaluates the performance of the GA-SLHH. In
addition, the GA-HH algorithm without a self-learning mechanism will also be used as
one of comparison approaches to evaluate the effectiveness of the self-learning mechanism
designed in this study.
(2) Case verification. The practicality of the GA-SLHH in this study is assessed through
the enterprise case of PMCU logistics equipment operation of a cruise ship manufacturer
for collaborative scheduling.
5.1. Performance Testing
To evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithm in this study, experiments will
be performed using benchmark instances from the research presented in [ 67] concerning the
fuzzy scheduling problem. Each instance included 10 tasks and 10 stages of operation per
task, and the task processing time can be seen as a triangular fuzzy number. Additionally, to
maintain consistency with the mathematical model proposed in this study, the due date for
all tasks is established according to the method outlined in [ 61]. The expected processing


=== PAGE 18 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 18 of 29
time (e.g., c2
i) for task iat each stage is summed and multiplied by a random number of
[1.5, 1.75 ]asd1
iof the due date of task i. Then, each d2
iis determined by adding a randomly
generated number on the closed interval [3,15] to each d1
i.
The relevant parameter settings required for the meta-heuristic and hyper-heuristic
algorithms are shown in Table 7. All algorithms use the same population size and maximum
number of iterations: the population size ps=30and maximum iteration maxIter =150.
The maximum CPU time for different algorithms is set to 180 s. In particular, for the GA,
the chromosome representation is based on integer encoding consisting of transportation
stage decision points, which is similar to the GA-SLHH. Each chromosome represents
the order in which tasks are processed at each stage. Population initialization is using
random generation. The crossover operator is single-point crossover, which is the same as
the general GA. The mutation operator is single-point mutation, which is the same as the
general GA.
Table 7. Parameters of algorithms.
Algorithms Type Parameters
GAMetaheuristicCrossover rate cr=0.8,
mutation rate mr=0.1
PSOInertia weight ω=0.85,
learning factor c1=c2=2
GA-SLHHHyper-heuristicCrossover rate cr=0.8,
mutation rate mr=0.1
GA-HHCrossover rate cr=0.8,
mutation rate mr=0.1
FIFO
Dispatching rule NoneSPT
MWKR
FRO
In order to avoid the influence of random factors of algorithms on the results generated
by the scheduling scheme, we will run each algorithm thirty times for each benchmark
instance. Then, calculate the average value of the objective function Favg, the maximum fuzzy
makespan f1, and the delivery date consistency index f2. Meanwhile, in order to evaluate
the optimization ability of the multi-objective method, the weights of the two optimization
objectives in the objective function for the experiment are set as ω1=0.5,ω2=0.5,and the
experimental results are shown in Table 8.
Table 8. Average values of 30 times for benchmark instances.
Benchmark InstancesMetaheuristic Hyper-Heuristic Dispatching Rule
GA PSO GA-SLHH GA-HH FIFO SPT MWKR FRO
Instance 1Favg 1.301 1.111 0.545 0.546 0.812 0.696 2.262 0.681
f1 48.09 49.13 36.99 37.05 40.75 35.5 53.75 41
f2 0.646 0.596 0.944 0.943 0.824 0.817 0.230 0.761
Instance 2Favg 1.175 1.261 0.640 1.069 1.039 1.001 1.967 1.206
f1 66.90 65.51 51.28 55.39 54.75 65.75 63 63.5
f2 0.401 0.354 0.547 0.634 0.655 0.745 0.305 0.565
Instance 3Favg 1.615 1.729 0.845 0.969 0.928 0.941 2.197 1.282
f1 74.05 75.15 55.56 60.63 62 67.25 68.75 68.25
f2 0.413 0.383 0.642 0.768 0.838 0.828 0.272 0.638
Instance 4Favg 1.440 1.456 0.805 0.935 0.817 0.812 2.221 0.914
f1 60.30 61.35 46.97 50.56 47.5 50 60.5 49.75
f2 0.447 0.454 0.643 0.754 0.863 0.898 0.263 0.752
In all instances, the GA-SLHH proposed in this study outperforms other methods re-
garding the optimization of the objective function Favg, and the optimization improvements


=== PAGE 19 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 19 of 29
compared to the GA, PSO, GA-HH, FIFO, SPT, MWKR, and FRO is, on average, 48.85%,
49.01%, 16.75%, 20.42%, 17.21%, 67.17%, and 28.23%, respectively. Under the current weight
settings, the average optimization effect of the GA-SLHH is slightly worse than that of the
SPT rule for the optimization objective f1only in Instance 1, with a difference of approxi-
mately 4.2%. This discrepancy is due to the tendency of the GA-SLHH to optimize towards
f2. Compared to other methods, the average optimization at f1is improved by, 23.38%,
23.98%, 5.76%, 6.77%, 10.31%, 22.83%, and 13.3%, respectively. In addition, compared with
other methods, the GA-SLHH will trade off the optimization objective f2optimization effect
for different problems to maintain a better Favgoptimization effect. Compared to other
methods, the average optimization effect is 45.46%, 55.54%, −11.19%, −12.7%, -15.47%,
167.57%, and 1.75%.
As can be seen from Figure 10, the proposed GA-SLHH has a better optimization
search ability and stability when compared with meta-heuristic algorithms and can find
the better solution for all instances. Compared with the commonly used dispatching rules,
the GA-SLHH will trade-off the optimization effect on a single optimization objective, but
has a stronger comprehensive optimization ability and stability.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 19 of 31 
 
 In all instances, the GA-SLHH proposed in this study outper forms other methods 
regarding the optimization of the objective function 𝐹௔௩௚, and the optimization improve-
ments compared to the GA, PSO, GA-HH, FI FO, SPT, MWKR, and FRO is, on average, 
48.85%, 49.01%, 16.75%, 20.42%, 17.21%, 67.17%, and 28.23%, respectively. Under the cur-
rent weight settings, the average optimization effect of the GA-SLHH is slightly worse 
than that of the SPT rule for the optimization objective 𝑓ଵ only in Instance 1, with a dif-
ference of approximately 4.2%. This discrepa ncy is due to the tendency of the GA-SLHH 
to optimize towards 𝑓ଶ. Compared to other methods, the average optimization at 𝑓ଵ is 
improved by, 23.38%, 23.98%, 5.76%, 6.77%, 10.31%, 22.83%, and 13.3%, respectively. In 
addition, compared with other methods, the GA-SLHH will trade off the optimization 
objective 𝑓ଶ optimization effect for different problems to maintain a better 𝐹௔௩௚ optimi-
zation effect. Compared to other methods, the average optimization effect is 45.46%, 
55.54%, −11.19%, −12.7%, -15.47%, 167.57%, and 1.75%. 
As can be seen from Figure 10, the pr oposed GA-SLHH has a better optimization 
search ability and stability when compared with meta-heuristic algorithms and can find 
the better solution for all instances. Compared with the commonly used dispatching rules, the GA-SLHH will trade-off the optimization effect on a single optimization objective, but 
has a stronger comprehensive opti mization ability and stability. 
 
Figure 10. Average fitness values of 30-time ca lculations on benchmark instances. 
Figure 11 shows the convergence curves of the GA-SLHH on each of the four bench-
mark instances. It can be seen that the algori thms all obtain the best value around 90 iter-
ations and there is no large variation observ ed between 90 and 150 iterations. Therefore, 
the maximum number of iterations is set to 1 50 to meet the requirements of the GA-SLHH. 
Figure 10. Average fitness values of 30-time calculations on benchmark instances.
Figure 11 shows the convergence curves of the GA-SLHH on each of the four bench-
mark instances. It can be seen that the algorithms all obtain the best value around
90 iterations and there is no large variation observed between 90 and 150 iterations. There-
fore, the maximum number of iterations is set to 150 to meet the requirements of the
GA-SLHH.
To further evaluate the performance of the GA-SLHH proposed in this paper for fuzzy
scheduling problems, we generated multiple sets of fuzzy scheduling test cases using
15 randomly generated parameter sets. The parameters used for generating these cases are
shown in Table 9. The number of operations and the processing time of each operation
are randomly generated from a uniform distribution within the upper and lower limit
values set in Table 9. The triangular fuzzy processing time∼
Cis= 
c1
is,c2
is,c3
is
is generated
as follows: Generate three random numbers r1,r2,r3in the range of process time, and then
c1
is=r1,c2
is=r1+r2,c3
is=r1+r2+r3, respectively. The due date is generated in the same
way as in the previous part of the computational experiments.
Depending on the size of the problems, we can classify the randomly generated cases
into three categories: small-scale (Cases 1–5), medium-scale (Cases 6–10), and large-scale
(Cases 11–15). We continue to utilize the eight algorithms listed in Table 8 to perform
performance testing on these cases. To avoid the influence of randomness, we have run the
eight algorithms 30 times and recorded the value of statistical results. The experimental


=== PAGE 20 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 20 of 29
weight is set to ω1=0.5,ω2=0.5, and the mean and standard deviation (std.) values for
each method are listed in Table 10.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 20 of 31 
 
  
Figure 11. Convergence curves of GA-SLH H on benchmark instances. 
To further evaluate the performance of the GA-SLHH proposed in this paper for 
fuzzy scheduling problems, we generated multiple sets of fuzzy scheduling test cases us-ing 15 randomly generated parameter sets. The parameters used for generating these cases 
are shown in Table 9. The number of operations  and the processing time of each operation 
are randomly generated from a uniform distribution within the upper and lower limit 
values set in Table 9. The triangular fuzzy processing time 𝐶
ప௦෪=( 𝑐௜௦ଵ,𝑐௜௦ଶ,𝑐௜௦ଷ) is generated 
as follows: Generate three random numbers 𝑟ଵ,𝑟ଶ,𝑟ଷ in the range of process time, and then 
𝑐௜௦ଵ=𝑟 ଵ, 𝑐௜௦ଶ=𝑟 ଵ+𝑟 ଶ, 𝑐௜௦ଷ=𝑟 ଵ+𝑟 ଶ+𝑟 ଷ, respectively. The due date is generated in the 
same way as in the previous part of the computational experiments. 
Table 9. Parameters for generating cases. 
Case Number of 
Tasks Number of 
Equipment Number of Operations 
per Task Processing Time of  
per Operation 
Case 1 4 2 [1,3] [1,5] 
Case 2 4 4 [1,3] [1,5] 
Case 3 6 4 [3,5] [2,7] Case 4 6 6 [3,5] [2,7] 
Case 5 8 6 [4,6] [5,9] 
Case 6 10 6 [4,6] [6,13] Case 7 10 10 [5,7] [7,20] 
Case 8 10 10 [5,10] [5,25] 
Case 9 15 5 [4,6] [1,10] 
Case 10 15 8 [5,7] [10,15] 
Case 11 15 8 [5,10] [1,10] Case 12 20 5 [5,10] [5,13] 
Case 13 20 8 [5,7] [5,13] 
Case 14 20 10 [5,7] [10,30] Case 15 30 10 [8,10] [10,30] 
Depending on the size of the problems, we can classify the randomly generated cases 
into three categories: small-scale (Cases 1–5), medium-scale (Cases 6–10), and large-scale 
(Cases 11–15). We continue to utilize the eigh t algorithms listed in Table 8 to perform 
performance testing on these cases. To avoi d the influence of randomness, we have run 
the eight algorithms 30 times and recorded th e value of statistical results. The experi-
mental weight is set to 𝜔ଵ=0 . 5 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 . 5 , and the mean and standard deviation (std.) 
values for each method are listed in Table 10. 
  0 30 60 90 120 1500.00.51.01.52.02.53.0Objective function value
Iteration Instance 1
 Instance 2
 Instance 3
 Instance 4
Figure 11. Convergence curves of GA-SLHH on benchmark instances.
Table 9. Parameters for generating cases.
Case Number of Tasks Number of EquipmentNumber of Operations
per TaskProcessing Time of
per Operation
Case 1 4 2 [1, 3] [1, 5]
Case 2 4 4 [1, 3] [1, 5]
Case 3 6 4 [3, 5] [2, 7]
Case 4 6 6 [3, 5] [2, 7]
Case 5 8 6 [4, 6] [5, 9]
Case 6 10 6 [4, 6] [6, 13]
Case 7 10 10 [5, 7] [7, 20]
Case 8 10 10 [5, 10] [5, 25]
Case 9 15 5 [4, 6] [1, 10]
Case 10 15 8 [5, 7] [10, 15]
Case 11 15 8 [5, 10] [1, 10]
Case 12 20 5 [5, 10] [5, 13]
Case 13 20 8 [5, 7] [5, 13]
Case 14 20 10 [5, 7] [10, 30]
Case 15 30 10 [8, 10] [10, 30]
All the best mean values in Table 10 have been bolded. It can be seen that, compared
to the commonly used meta-heuristic algorithms GA and PSO, and the hyper-heuristic
algorithm GA-HH, the GA-SLHH proposed in this paper has smaller mean and standard
deviation values than the other methods for all sizes of problems, and exhibits a stronger
capacity of optimization and stronger stability. Compared with the GA and PSO, the GA-
SLHH has stronger exploration and exploitation capacities because of its hyper-heuristic
hierarchical mapping decoding mechanism. At the same time, the uniform crossover
operator and multi-point mutation effectively increase the population diversity during the
algorithm iteration. Benefiting from the adaptive adjustment of the mapping probability
through the self-learning mechanism, the GA-SLHH can be more suitable for the problem of
dispatching rules, and the solution is superior to the GA-HH. Compared with dispatching
rules, the GA-SLHH proposed in this paper is able to find relatively better optimization
results for most of problems. It has been demonstrated that the solution of multiple
dispatching rules applied together is better than that of single dispatching rule. However,
in specific small-sized problems (Cases 5) and some medium-sized problems ( Cases 6–7 ), in
terms of the scheduling results obtained, the SPT outperforms the GA-SLHH, but the results
obtained by the GA-SLHH are still in second place and the GA-SLHH still outperforms


=== PAGE 21 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 21 of 29
the other scheduling rules. Although the results obtained by the GA-SLHH may not
be superior to the scheduling rules in some cases, the method is able to provide more
diversity in the optimization of the scheduling scheme and satisfy the possibilities of the
production decision execution. It is also important to note that, since the dispatching rule
is scheduling the same problem using the same methodology at all decision points, the
scheduling solutions obtained by the dispatching rules are unique, and, therefore, its result
has a standard deviation value of zero.
Table 10. Statistical values of algorithms.
CaseMetaheuristic Hyper-Heuristic Dispatching Rule
GA PSO GA-SLHH GA-HH FIFO SPT MWKR FRO
mean std. mean std. mean std. mean std. mean std. mean std. mean std. mean std.
Case 1 0.788 0.065 0.789 0.069 0.702 0.012 0.874 0.081 1.759 0.000 1.905 0.000 4.533 0.000 1.004 0.000
Case 2 0.512 0.015 0.517 0.021 0.504 0.000 0.534 0.025 0.641 0.000 0.524 0.000 0.924 0.000 0.641 0.000
Case 3 0.932 0.066 0.924 0.113 0.908 0.042 1.089 0.084 1.192 0.000 1.081 0.000 3.054 0.000 1.287 0.000
Case 4 0.657 0.032 0.652 0.026 0.609 0.023 0.661 0.021 0.693 0.000 0.644 0.000 0.860 0.000 0.819 0.000
Case 5 1.138 0.096 1.150 0.103 1.088 0.035 1.223 0.050 1.323 0.000 1.062 0.000 1.546 0.000 1.306 0.000
Case 6 1.567 0.146 1.608 0.205 1.560 0.049 1.774 0.098 2.071 0.000 1.537 0.000 3.522 0.000 1.982 0.000
Case 7 1.067 0.124 1.053 0.085 1.037 0.019 1.114 0.035 1.179 0.000 1.001 0.000 1.580 0.000 1.251 0.000
Case 8 1.293 0.107 1.202 0.160 0.888 0.039 0.951 0.023 1.234 0.000 1.120 0.000 1.624 0.000 1.625 0.000
Case 9 6.784 2.343 6.717 2.174 6.277 0.582 9.829 1.741 60.737 0.000 17.732 0.000 694.691 0.000 20.927 0.000
Case 10 3.301 0.457 3.216 0.569 2.747 0.077 3.038 0.125 3.093 0.000 2.798 0.000 6.236 0.000 3.298 0.000
Case 11 2.998 0.432 3.125 0.582 1.817 0.080 2.143 0.154 2.203 0.000 2.940 0.000 4.601 0.000 2.219 0.000
Case 12 20.983 4.017 20.864 4.154 14.122 0.662 16.734 1.077 25.720 0.000 26.400 0.000 57.592 0.000 26.205 0.000
Case 13 8.556 1.851 9.403 2.387 5.138 0.220 5.994 0.479 11.074 0.000 11.070 0.000 24.868 0.000 9.182 0.000
Case 14 4.896 1.054 4.744 1.031 3.756 0.150 4.393 0.275 4.901 0.000 6.074 0.000 30.239 0.000 5.515 0.000
Case 15 56.615 25.364 59.560 31.099 22.422 2.206 37.503 6.097 55.684 0.000 95.365 0.000 118.121 0.000 43.898 0.000
5.2. Case Verification
To evaluate the applicability of the GA-SLHH proposed in this paper for the PMCU
logistics collaborative scheduling problem, an instance of a production case from a cruise
ship manufacturing enterprise is used for testing. The case contains eight assembled
PMCUs, eight PMCUs awaiting transport, and ten batches of outfitting supplies. The
transportation equipment consisting of three forklifts, four delivery trucks, and two cabin
lifts. Due to factors such as the modification status of the equipment, the placement of
PMCUs in the yard, and the varying heights of the target decks, the same equipment
requires a different processing time for different tasks.
In all tasks, the assembled PMCUs indicate that the assembly is complete and needs
to leave the shop, requiring only one stage of the forklift operation. PMCUs awaiting
transportation indicate that they need to be transported on board a ship for installation,
which requires three stages of transportation: forklift operation, truck transportation, and
cabin lift operation. Outfitting supplies denote materials, components, and other supplies
that need to be carried on board for construction, and which need to complete only one
stage of the cabin lift operation. The fuzzy operation and transportation time of the tasks
on different equipment are shown in Table 11 (unit: minute). The empty values in Table 11
indicate that it does not need to be processed by the equipment at that stage.
For the two optimization objectives in this study, three sets of weights are set to
represent the tendency of decision-makers in the actual scheduling. When ω1=1and
ω2=0, it means that only the fuzzy completion time is considered to be optimized
during the PMCU logistics scheduling process, without considering the optimization of
the average fuzzy due date agreement index. Conversely, when ω1=0andω2=1, it
means that only the average fuzzy due date agreement index is considered to be optimized.
When ω1=ω2=0.5, it means that two optimization objectives need to be optimized in
a balanced manner. Each of the three combinations of weights represents the preferred
choice of the shipyard decision-maker for PMCU logistics scheduling based on the actual
project situation. The comparison method uses the methods in Section 5.1, and the relevant
parameters of all the algorithms are kept the same as in Section 5.1, which are run 30 times,
respectively, and the best value, the worst value, and the average value of the objective
function Fare counted. The case verification results are shown in Table 12.


=== PAGE 22 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 22 of 29
Table 11. Fuzzy transport time and due date of PMCU logistics equipment.
Task No.Assembly
Completion
TimeFuzzy
due DateFuzzy Transportation Time
Forklift Delivery Truck Cabin Lift
1 2 3 1 2 3 4 1 2
Assembled
PMCU1 (5,6,7) (13,15) (8,12,15) (10,13,14) (12,14,15) - - - - - -
2 (8,9,10) (17,20) (10,16,20) (11,13,15) (12,13,15) - - - - - -
3 (45,46,47) (53,59) (15,18,20) (20,25,27) (11,16,20) - - - - - -
4 (52,56,62) (60,63) (16,23,25) (23,25,27) (12,15,20) - - - - - -
5 (88,90,93) (110,115) (14,15,19) (15,18,20) (13,16,19) - - - - - -
6 (100,106,108) (120,130) (17,20,25) (18,22,28) (15,18,19) - - - - - -
7 (150,158,163) (176,182) (15,20,25) (18,22,24) (16,18,21) - - - - - -
8 (172,180,190) (191,203) (16,20,24) (13,17,20) (17,22,25) - - - - - -
PMCU
awaiting
trans-
porta-
tion1 - (63,70) (5,10,12) (2,8,10) (6,12,15) (40,50,62) (53,65,73) (45,53,62) (43,59,76) - (10,15,20)
2 - (75,80) (4,8,15) (3,7,11) (2,4,6) (56,60,68) (50,58,66) (40,50,55) (50,63,76) - (12,13,15)
3 - (160,172) (8,10,12) (5,7,10) (7,9,13) (58,66,73) (51,60,66) (43,54,65) (60,65,76) - (10,14,19)
4 - (92,103) (9,10,12) (6,8,10) (10,11,13) (59,65,70) (51,60,80) (56,63,65) (42,55,63) - (13,18,21)
5 - (109,115) (11,13,15) (9,12,16) (5,7,13) (43,56,69) (47,54,76) (35,56,60) (47,53,66) (11,12,15) -
6 - (225,246) (8,10,13) (7,11,15) (8,10,13) (42,57,63) (45,54,66) (38,58,63) (52,59,63) (7,12,15) -
7 - (235,250) (9,12,18) (6,9,13) (5,7,9) (42,56,63) (53,59,66) (59,66,78) (62,72,79) (10,13,17) -
8 - (247,260) (4,5,10) (7,10,13) (11,16,19) (46,56,63) (53,59,66) (59,66,78) (62,72,79) (12,15,17)
Outfitting
supplies1 - (65,75) - - - - - - - (43,50,58) (34,43,46)
2 - (70,83) - - - - - - - (15,20,31) (16,18,22)
3 - (110,120) - - - - - - - (23,25,28) (34,39,40)
4 - (110,120) - - - - - - - (23,25,28) (16,20,22)
5 - (156,170) - - - - - - - (43,50,58) (34,43,46)
6 - (164,180) - - - - - - - (15,20,31) (16,18,22)
7 - (180,190) - - - - - - - (23,25,28) (34,39,40)
8 - (176,193) - - - - - - - (14,18,21) (16,20,22)
9 - (208,212) - - - - - - - (23,25,28) (34,39,40)
10 - (245,260) - - - - - - - (14,18,21) (16,20,22)
Table 12. Case verification results with different weights.
Algorithms Type Weight Favg Fbest Fworst
GA
Metaheuristicω1=0.5,ω2=0.5 7.386 4.836 10.023
ω1=1,ω2=0 0.466 0.336 0.634
ω1=0,ω2=1 8.567 6.664 10.796
PSOω1=0.5,ω2=0.5 7.706 5.279 9.514
ω1=1,ω2=0 0.634 0.281 0.841
ω1=0,ω2=1 7.962 5.257 11.568
GA-SLHH
Hyper-
heuristicω1=0.5,ω2=0.5 2.813 2.336 3.510
ω1=1,ω2=0 0.253 0.210 0.287
ω1=0,ω2=1 5.528 4.479 6.645
GA-HHω1=0.5,ω2=0.5 3.927 2.692 5.181
ω1=1,ω2=0 0.319 0.271 0.409
ω1=0,ω2=1 7.102 5.137 9.444
FIFO
Dispatching
ruleω1=0.5,ω2=0.5 - 4.154 -
ω1=1,ω2=0 - 0.216 -
ω1=0,ω2=1 - 8.093 -
SPTω1=0.5,ω2=0.5 - 3.531 -
ω1=1,ω2=0 - 0.313 -
ω1=0,ω2=1 - 6.749 -
MWKRω1=0.5,ω2=0.5 - 6.587 -
ω1=1,ω2=0 - 0.217 -
ω1=0,ω2=1 - 12.958 -
FROω1=0.5,ω2=0.5 - 4.226 -
ω1=1,ω2=0 - 0.418 -
ω1=0,ω2=1 - 8.033 -
According to the results in Table 12, it can be seen that, compared with the commonly
used meta-heuristic algorithms, such as the GA, PSO, and GA-HH, which do not incorpo-
rate a self-learning mechanism, the GA-SLHH proposed in this study shows significant
advantages in the cruise ship enterprise case under all three weights. In addition, due to
the uniqueness of schemes based on dispatching rules, the best and worst values of the
dispatching rule in Table 12 are the same as the average. Compared with the GA-SLHH,
only when the weights are set to ω1=1,ω2=0, the scheme generated according to the


=== PAGE 23 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 23 of 29
rule FIFO has the same best fitness value as the GA-SLHH, and the GA-SLHH still has a
significant advantage over other single dispatching rules under other weights.
Meanwhile, to evaluate the performance differences between the meta-heuristic algo-
rithm and the hyper-heuristic algorithm in the enterprise case, a boxplot is plotted based on
the experimental results under the three sets of weight settings (i.e., Figure 12), respectively.
From Figure 12, hyper-heuristics outperform meta-heuristics at different weight settings.
The GA-SLHH proposed in this study outperforms other methods in terms of stability and
capability of optimization search in the case of cruise ship PMCU collaborative scheduling
problems. It can provide decision-makers with decision support in different directions
during the production process of the enterprise.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 23 of 31 
 
 𝜔ଵ=0 , 𝜔 ଶ=1 8.567 6.664 10.796 
PSO 𝜔ଵ=0 . 5 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 . 5  7.706 5.279 9.514 
𝜔ଵ=1 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 0.634 0.281 0.841 
𝜔ଵ=0 , 𝜔 ଶ=1 7.962 5.257 11.568 
GA-SLHH 
Hyper-heuristic 𝜔ଵ=0 . 5 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 . 5  2.813 2.336 3.510 
𝜔ଵ=1 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 0.253 0.210 0.287 
𝜔ଵ=0 , 𝜔 ଶ=1 5.528 4.479 6.645 
GA-HH 𝜔ଵ=0 . 5 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 . 5  3.927 2.692 5.181 
𝜔ଵ=1 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 0.319 0.271 0.409 
𝜔ଵ=0 , 𝜔 ଶ=1 7.102 5.137 9.444 
FIFO 
Dispatching rule 𝜔ଵ=0 . 5 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 . 5  - 4.154 - 
𝜔ଵ=1 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 - 0.216 - 
𝜔ଵ=0 , 𝜔 ଶ=1 - 8.093 - 
SPT 𝜔ଵ=0 . 5 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 . 5  - 3.531 - 
𝜔ଵ=1 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 - 0.313 - 
𝜔ଵ=0 , 𝜔 ଶ=1 - 6.749 - 
MWKR 𝜔ଵ=0 . 5 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 . 5  - 6.587 - 
𝜔ଵ=1 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 - 0.217 - 
𝜔ଵ=0 , 𝜔 ଶ=1 - 12.958 - 
FRO 𝜔ଵ=0 . 5 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 . 5  - 4.226 - 
𝜔ଵ=1 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 - 0.418 - 
𝜔ଵ=0 , 𝜔 ଶ=1 - 8.033 - 
According to the results in Table 12, it can be seen that, compared with the commonly 
used meta-heuristic algorithms, such as th e GA, PSO, and GA-HH, which do not incorpo-
rate a self-learning mechanism, the GA-SLHH proposed in this study shows significant 
advantages in the cruise ship enterprise case under all three weights. In addition, due to 
the uniqueness of schemes based on dispatching rules, the best and worst values of the dispatching rule in Table 12 are the same as the average. Compared with the GA-SLHH, 
only when the weights are set to 𝜔ଵ=1 , 𝜔 ଶ=0, the scheme generated according to the 
rule FIFO has the same best fitness value as the GA-SLHH, and the GA-SLHH still has a 
significant advantage over other single dispatching rules under other weights. 
Meanwhile, to evaluate the performance di fferences between the meta-heuristic al-
gorithm and the hyper-heuristic algorithm in the enterprise case, a boxplot is plotted 
based on the experimental results under the three sets of weight settings (i.e., Figure 12), 
respectively. From Figure 12, hyper-heuristi cs outperform meta-heuristics at different 
weight settings. The GA-SLHH proposed in this study outperforms other methods in 
terms of stability and capability of optimization search in the case of cruise ship PMCU 
collaborative scheduling problems. It can provide decision-makers with decision support 
in different directions during the production process of the enterprise. 
 
Figure 12. Boxplots of meta-heuristic and hyper-heuristic.
It can be seen that the GA-SLHH proposed in this paper has a good performance in
solving the PMCU logistics collaborative scheduling problem. On one hand, the improve-
ment of the genetic operator improves the exploration and exploitation capacities of the
GA-SLHH. On the other hand, the GA-SLHH utilizes the advantages of hyper-heuristic
algorithms to deal with complex constrained problems, transforming the solution search
space from the problem itself to the scheduling rule space, and introduces a self-learning
mechanism to explore the relevance of decisions in the decision-making process, further re-
alizing the performance improvement of the algorithm. Compared with the meta-heuristic
algorithms GA and PSO, it exhibits a stronger search capability and stability under all
three different weight cases. Compared with the well-known dispatching rules FIFO, SPT,
MWKR, and FRO, it also shows a stronger applicability and optimization capability for
different optimization scenarios. Compared with the GA-HH, which lacks a self-learning
mechanism, the GA-SLHH shows enhanced optimization capabilities and adaptability to
different weight cases.
Table 13 shows the computational time for different meta-heuristics and hyper-
heuristics. As a result of the hyper-heuristic framework, which can avoid a lot of judgment
and repair operations of infeasible solutions, the computation time of the GA-SLHH is
always less than that of the GA and PSO. The introduction of the self-learning mechanism
incurs some additional computational costs; the computational time of the GA-HH remains
slightly less than that of the GA-SLHH, which is also expected. As an application example,
the Gantt charts of the results of the scheduling scheme with different weight settings are
shown in Figures 13–15.


=== PAGE 24 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 24 of 29
Table 13. Computational times of different algorithms.
AlgorithmComputational Time (Unit: Seconds)
ω1= 0.5,ω2= 0.5 ω1= 1,ω2= 0 ω1= 0,ω2= 1
GA 25.869 24.617 25.249
PSO 26.429 27.052 26.888
GA-SLHH 16.754 16.614 17.217
GA-HH 11.659 12.112 12.597
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 25 of 31 
 
  
Figure 13. Scheduling scheme under 𝜔ଵ=0 . 5 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 . 5 . 
 
Figure 14. Scheduling scheme under 𝜔ଵ=1 , 𝜔 ଶ=0. 
Equipment
Equipment
Figure 13. Scheduling scheme under ω1=0.5,ω2=0.5.
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 25 of 31 
 
  
Figure 13. Scheduling scheme under 𝜔ଵ=0 . 5 , 𝜔 ଶ=0 . 5 . 
 
Figure 14. Scheduling scheme under 𝜔ଵ=1 , 𝜔 ଶ=0. 
Equipment
Equipment
Figure 14. Scheduling scheme under ω1=1,ω2=0.


=== PAGE 25 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 25 of 29
Biomimetics 2024 , 9, x FOR PEER REVIEW 26 of 31 
 
  
Figure 15. Scheduling scheme under 𝜔ଵ=0 , 𝜔 ଶ=1. 
6. Managerial Implications 
This paper aims to solve the problem of collaborative scheduling for PMCU logistics 
in yard operations and transportation during the construction of domestic large cruise 
ships. The early or delayed completion of pr oduction activities is prevalent in Chinese 
cruise ship manufacturers. The construction of cruise ships is subject to strict plan con-
straints and require more robust activity management to control deviations from the ac-
tual schedule to plan. The constant-value scheduling scheme solved by conventional 
scheduling methods does not provide a complete measure of the early or delayed produc-
tion activities. The fuzzy scheduling method proposed in this paper (i.e., the fuzzy math-ematical model and GA-SLHH) converts the scheduling scheme from a constant value to 
a fuzzy time interval, which is able to evaluate and manage the production of the enter-
prise more efficiently and meets the needs of cr uise ship construction projects. In addition, 
adding fuzzy processing time and fuzzy due da te to the optimization model can generate 
more flexible and adaptive scheduling schemes, which can cope with the changes in and beyond the actual production in cruise ship  manufacturers, thus enhancing the schedul-
ing efficiency and robustness.  
Under further research of Industry 4.0 an d intelligent ship manufacturing, Chinese 
cruise ship manufacturing enterprises should th oroughly consider the impact of each part 
of the cruise ship production process on pr oduction as much as possible when carrying 
out Just-In-Time (JIT) production. Especially for PMCU, which is a brand-new intermedi-
ate product for the shipbuilding industry, it is  more important to arrange for the relevant 
departments to make rational production and transportation plans and guide the produc-tion operation effectively, to improve the efficiency of the intermediate process, reduce 
the cost of the enterprise, and enhance the competitiveness of the enterprise. According 
to the cruise ship manufacturer data esti mation, the manufacturer currently takes 7 –8 h to 
complete the PMCU logistic process. The on-site production department will set the de-
livery date within the required timeframe. The on-site production department will set the 
due date within the required time. However, the current scheduling approach is on-site 
Equipment
Figure 15. Scheduling scheme under ω1=0,ω2=1.
6. Managerial Implications
This paper aims to solve the problem of collaborative scheduling for PMCU logistics in
yard operations and transportation during the construction of domestic large cruise ships.
The early or delayed completion of production activities is prevalent in Chinese cruise ship
manufacturers. The construction of cruise ships is subject to strict plan constraints and
require more robust activity management to control deviations from the actual schedule to
plan. The constant-value scheduling scheme solved by conventional scheduling methods
does not provide a complete measure of the early or delayed production activities. The
fuzzy scheduling method proposed in this paper (i.e., the fuzzy mathematical model and
GA-SLHH) converts the scheduling scheme from a constant value to a fuzzy time interval,
which is able to evaluate and manage the production of the enterprise more efficiently and
meets the needs of cruise ship construction projects. In addition, adding fuzzy processing
time and fuzzy due date to the optimization model can generate more flexible and adaptive
scheduling schemes, which can cope with the changes in and beyond the actual production
in cruise ship manufacturers, thus enhancing the scheduling efficiency and robustness.
Under further research of Industry 4.0 and intelligent ship manufacturing, Chinese
cruise ship manufacturing enterprises should thoroughly consider the impact of each part
of the cruise ship production process on production as much as possible when carrying out
Just-In-Time (JIT) production. Especially for PMCU, which is a brand-new intermediate
product for the shipbuilding industry, it is more important to arrange for the relevant de-
partments to make rational production and transportation plans and guide the production
operation effectively, to improve the efficiency of the intermediate process, reduce the cost
of the enterprise, and enhance the competitiveness of the enterprise. According to the cruise
ship manufacturer data estimation, the manufacturer currently takes 7–8 h to complete the
PMCU logistic process. The on-site production department will set the delivery date within
the required timeframe. The on-site production department will set the due date within
the required time. However, the current scheduling approach is on-site and on-demand,
and situations such as the temporary occupation of resources can cause delivery delays.
The proposed algorithm in this study provides PMCU logistics scheduling from the overall
project perspective. At the same time, enterprise managers set the weights to determine the
optimization direction according to the actual situation of the project. For example, when


=== PAGE 26 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 26 of 29
the construction of a cruise ship’s cabin area is expedited, the optimization objective can be
weighted with ω1=1. From the results of this paper, it can be seen that the maximum time
required to complete all cabin logistics is reduced to 4.7 h, representing a 37% decrease
in transportation time, thereby ensuring that on-site supply requirements for PMCUs are
met. The rational scheduling approach can simultaneously improve the transportation
efficiency of PMCUs and the degree of plan matching, which is very important for the
future development of Chinese cruise ship manufacturing enterprises.
7. Conclusions
This paper mainly focuses on the collaborative scheduling problem of prefabricated
cabin logistics in the production process of cruise ships and constructs a multi-objective
fuzzy collaborative scheduling model for PMCU logistics. The objectives of this model are
minimizing the maximum fuzzy makespan and the maximum fuzzy due date agreement
index. We introduce a new genetic hyper-heuristic algorithm with a self-learning mecha-
nism (GA-SLHH) to solve the problem. The performance of the GA-SLHH for the proposed
problem are verified based on computational experiments, and the impact of the results for
real-world production are analyzed. Our main conclusions are summarized below:
1. This research provides an in-depth analysis of the logistical operations for PMCUs.
By characterizing the inherent uncertainties, the bidirectional operations, and the
intersection of multiple tasks and equipment types, we have developed a multi-
objective mathematical model that reflects the process of PMCU logistics. The two
optimization objectives represent the efficiency and plan execution accuracy of PMCU
logistics in cruise shipyard, respectively, which have higher practical application
significance.
2. We propose a novel GA-SLHH to solve the model in this paper. The low-level heuristic
is composed of 14 basic dispatching rules. The high-level strategy adopts genetic
algorithms and self-learning mechanisms interacting together to drive the low-level
heuristics. The self-learning mechanism introduced into the high-level strategy is
more suitable for human decision-making characteristics and is more applicable to
actual problems in shipyards.
3. The performance of the proposed GA-SLHH is validated through performance ex-
periments and an enterprise case. The GA-SLHH shows a superior optimization
performance compared to its competitors in the majority of performance experiment
instances. In the enterprise case experiments, the GA-SLHH under different optimiza-
tion weight settings all achieve the best objective function values, showing a better
applicability to real-world problems.
4. Different from conventional scheduling methods, the GA-SLHH provides cruise
shipyards with rational fuzzy scheduling schemes under different circumstances of
the project. It is more beneficial for managers to adjust and control the production
activities within PMCU logistics under different demands. In a certain application
scenario, the scheduling scheme obtained using the methodology of this study can
achieve an approximately 37% reduction in time.
The GA-SLHH proposed in this paper enhances the applicability of the models and
methods in this paper to real-world problems, but it is lacking in considering the dynamic
events that may occur in the logistics chain that cause large changes in the scheduling
scheme. In future studies, dynamic factors in PMCU logistics, such as worker absence,
equipment maintenance, and emergency arrival, will be investigated to further improve
the applicability of the study. The suitable low-level heuristic operators and high-level
strategies will be designed, so as to minimize the impact of the occurrence of dynamic
events on the original scheduling scheme. Moreover, future work will focus on optimizing
the framework of the GA-SLHH to enhance computational efficiency. This refinement is
expected to expedite the processing of statistical probabilities, further elevating the model’s
practical utility.


=== PAGE 27 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 27 of 29
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.L. and R.D.; methodology, R.D.; software, R.D. and
W.H.; validation, R.D., W.H., and P .L.; formal analysis, R.D.; investigation, R.D., X.W., and W.H.;
resources, J.L. and X.W.; data curation, P .L.; writing—original draft preparation, R.D. and W.H.;
writing—review and editing, J.L. and R.D.; visualization, W.H. and P .L.; supervision, J.L. and X.W.;
project administration, X.W.; funding acquisition, J.L. and X.W. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Ministerial Civil Ship Research Project of China (Grant
number [2024]56).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data are contained within the article.
Acknowledgments: The authors are responsible for the contents of this publication. In addition, the
authors would like to thank their lab classmates for their contribution to the writing quality.
Conflicts of Interest: Author Xiaoyuan Wu works for SWS Co., Ltd. and declares no conflicts
of interest. The other authors work for Harbin Engineering University and declare no conflicts
of interest.
References
1. Abualigah, L.; Elaziz, M.A.; Khasawneh, A.M.; Alshinwan, M.; Ibrahim, R.A.; Al-qaness, M.A.A.; Mirjalili, S.; Sumari, P .;
Gandomi, A.H. Meta-Heuristic Optimization Algorithms for Solving Real-World Mechanical Engineering Design Problems: A
Comprehensive Survey, Applications, Comparative Analysis, and Results. Neural. Comput. Applic. 2022 ,34, 4081–4110. [CrossRef]
2. Van Thieu, N.; Mirjalili, S. MEALPY: An Open-Source Library for Latest Meta-Heuristic Algorithms in Python. J. Syst. Archit.
2023 ,139, 102871. [CrossRef]
3. Bouazza, W. Hyper-Heuristics Applications to Manufacturing Scheduling: Overview and Opportunities. IFAC Pap. 2023 ,56,
935–940. [CrossRef]
4. Drake, J.H.; Kheiri, A.; Özcan, E.; Burke, E.K. Recent Advances in Selection Hyper-Heuristics. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2020 ,285, 405–428.
[CrossRef]
5. Qian, C.; Tang, K.; Zhou, Z.-H. Selection Hyper-Heuristics Can Provably Be Helpful in Evolutionary Multi-Objective Optimization.
In Proceedings of the Parallel Problem Solving from Nature—PPSN XIV , Edinburgh, UK, 17–21 September 2016; Handl, J.,
Hart, E., Lewis, P .R., L ópez-Ib áñez, M., Ochoa, G., Paechter, B., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2016;
pp. 835–846.
6. Dokeroglu, T.; Kucukyilmaz, T.; Talbi, E.-G. Hyper-Heuristics: A Survey and Taxonomy. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2024 ,187, 109815.
[CrossRef]
7. Olgun, B.; Koç, Ç.; Altıparmak, F. A Hyper Heuristic for the Green Vehicle Routing Problem with Simultaneous Pickup and
Delivery. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2021 ,153, 107010. [CrossRef]
8. Xue, W. Analysis of the application of prefabricated modular cabin unit technology on passenger ship construction. Mech. Electr.
Technol. 2019 ,4, 74–76. [CrossRef]
9. Li, Y. Prefabricated modular cabin unit technology and its application prospect in domestic shipbuilding industry. Mar. Technol.
2007 ,4, 20–22.
10. Luo, L.; Liu, C.; Ma, J.; Yu, D.; Chen, T. Application of Prefabricated Modular Cabin Unit. Guangdong Shipbuild. 2021 ,40, 53–55+52.
11. Li, J.; Yan, H.; Yang, B.; Zhou, Q. Improved genetic-harmony search algorithm for solving workshop scheduling problem of
marine equipment. Comput. Integr. Manuf. Syst. 2022 ,28, 3923–3936. [CrossRef]
12. Li, J.; Guo, H.; Zhou, Q.; Yang, B. Vehicle Routing and Scheduling Optimization of Ship Steel Distribution Center under Green
Shipbuilding Mode. Sustainability 2019 ,11, 4248. [CrossRef]
13. Guo, H.; Wang, J.; Sun, J.; Mao, X. Multi-Objective Green Vehicle Scheduling Problem Considering Time Window and Emission
Factors in Ship Block Transportation. Sci. Rep. 2024 ,14, 10796. [CrossRef]
14. Wang, J.; Yin, J.; Khan, R.U.; Wang, S.; Zheng, T. A Study of Inbound Logistics Mode Based on JIT Production in Cruise Ship
Construction. Sustainability 2021 ,13, 1588. [CrossRef]
15. Sender, J.; Klink, S.; Flügge, W. Method for Integrated Logistics Planning in Shipbuilding. Procedia CIRP 2020 ,88, 122–126.
[CrossRef]
16. Guo, H.; Li, J.; Yang, B.; Mao, X.; Zhou, Q. Green Scheduling Optimization of Ship Plane Block Flow Line Considering Carbon
Emission and Noise. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2020 ,148, 106680. [CrossRef]
17. Li, J.; Guo, H. A Hybrid Whale Optimization Algorithm for Plane Block Parallel Blocking Flowline Scheduling Optimization
With Deterioration Effect in Lean Shipbuilding. IEEE Access 2021 ,9, 131893–131905. [CrossRef]
18. Zhou, T.; Luo, L.; He, Y.; Fan, Z.; Ji, S. Solving Panel Block Assembly Line Scheduling Problem via a Novel Deep Reinforcement
Learning Approach. Appl. Sci. 2023 ,13, 8483. [CrossRef]


=== PAGE 28 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 28 of 29
19. Wang, C.; Mao, P .; Mao, Y.; Shin, J.G. Research on Scheduling and Optimization under Uncertain Conditions in Panel Block
Production Line in Shipbuilding. Int. J. Nav. Archit. Ocean Eng. 2016 ,8, 398–408. [CrossRef]
20. Jingsong, B.; Xiaofeng, H.; Ye, J. A Heuristic Method to Schedule Pipe-Processing Flowshop in a Shipyard. J. Ship Prod. 2007 ,23,
210–214. [CrossRef]
21. Yang, Z.; Liu, C.; Zhang, S.; Shi, J. A Multi-Objective Memetic Algorithm for a Fuzzy Parallel Blocking Flow Shop Scheduling
Problem of Panel Block Assembly in Shipbuilding. J. Ship Prod. Des. 2019 ,35, 170–181. [CrossRef]
22. Chen, G.; Wu, X.; Li, J.; Guo, H. Green Vehicle Routing and Scheduling Optimization of Ship Steel Distribution Center Based on
Improved Intelligent Water Drop Algorithms. Math. Probl. Eng. 2020 ,2020 , e9839634. [CrossRef]
23. Chen, G.; Jiang, Y.; Sheng, X.; Wang, J.; Jia, H. Workstation-Oriented Distribution Optimization of Shipbuilding Materials. MATEC
Web Conf. 2019 ,272, 01014. [CrossRef]
24. Liu, J.; Yin, J.; Khan, R.U. Scheduling Management and Optimization Analysis of Intermediate Products Transfer in a Shipyard
for Cruise Ships. PLoS ONE 2022 ,17, e0265047. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Chen, Y.; Jiang, Z. Multi-AGVs Scheduling with Vehicle Conflict Consideration in Ship Outfitting Items Warehouse. J. Shanghai
Jiaotong Univ. (Sci.) 2022 ,29, 492–508. [CrossRef]
26. Wang, S.; Sun, Y.; Luo, Q.; Li, Z.; Wang, A. A Spatial Scheduling Strategy Based on Evaluation of the Remaining Usable Area for
Shipbuilding. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation (ICMA), Guilin, China,
7–10 August 2022; pp. 24–29.
27. Ahn, N.; Kim, S. A Mathematical Formulation and a Heuristic for the Spatial Scheduling of Mega-Blocks in Shipbuilding Industry.
J. Ship Prod. Des. 2022 ,38, 193–198. [CrossRef]
28. Wang, T.; Mo, X.; Chen, M.; Hu, X. An Improved Spatial Scheduling Algorithm for Sub-Assembly in Shipbuilding. In Proceedings
of the 2023 IEEE 19th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering (CASE), Auckland, New Zealand, 26–30
August 2023; pp. 1–6.
29. Mao, X.; Li, J.; Guo, H.; Wu, X. Research on Collaborative Planning and Symmetric Scheduling for Parallel Shipbuilding Projects
in the Open Distributed Manufacturing Environment. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 161. [CrossRef]
30. Zhou, Q.; Li, J.; Dong, R.; Zhou, Q.; Yang, B. Optimization of Multi-Execution Modes and Multi-Resource-Constrained Offshore
Equipment Project Scheduling Based on a Hybrid Genetic Algorithm. CMES 2022 ,134, 1263–1281. [CrossRef]
31. Rahman, H.F.; Servranckx, T.; Chakrabortty, R.K.; Vanhoucke, M.; El Sawah, S. Manufacturing Project Scheduling Considering
Human Factors to Minimize Total Cost and Carbon Footprints. Appl. Soft Comput. 2022 ,131, 109764. [CrossRef]
32. Wu, L.; Jiang, Z.; Li, X. A Stack-Based Retrieval Method for the Steel Plate Yard Retrieval Problem in Shipbuilding. Flex. Serv.
Manuf. J. 2023 ,36, 343–377. [CrossRef]
33. Kai, C.; Zuhua, J.; Jianfeng, L.; Bo, S.; Yongwen, H. Shipbuilding Yard Scheduling with Block Inbound Time Window. J. Shanghai
Jiaotong Univ. 2016 ,50, 1390–1398. [CrossRef]
34. Chu, L.; Liang, D.; Zhou, Y.; Xu, X.; Zhang, Y.; Ruan, Z.; Xiao, H.; Zuo, S. Co-Scheduling of Quay Cranes and RTGs in the
Container Terminal. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Smart Internet of Things (SmartIoT), Suzhou,
China, 19–21 August 2022; pp. 116–124.
35. Pu, Y.; Liu, H.; Wang, J.; Hou, Y. Collaborative Scheduling of Port Integrated Energy and Container Logistics Considering Electric
and Hydrogen-Powered Transport. IEEE Trans. Smart Grid 2023 ,14, 4345–4359. [CrossRef]
36. Wang, G.-G.; Gao, D.; Pedrycz, W. Solving Multiobjective Fuzzy Job-Shop Scheduling Problem by a Hybrid Adaptive Differential
Evolution Algorithm. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2022 ,18, 8519–8528. [CrossRef]
37. Cengiz Toklu, M. A Fuzzy Multi-Criteria Approach Based on Clarke and Wright Savings Algorithm for Vehicle Routing Problem
in Humanitarian Aid Distribution. J. Intell. Manuf. 2023 ,34, 2241–2261. [CrossRef]
38. Afsar, S.; Palacios, J.J.; Puente, J.; Vela, C.R.; Gonz ález-Rodr íguez, I. Multi-Objective Enhanced Memetic Algorithm for Green Job
Shop Scheduling with Uncertain Times. Swarm Evol. Comput. 2022 ,68, 101016. [CrossRef]
39. Kong, L.; Ji, M.; Gao, Z. An Exact Algorithm for Scheduling Tandem Quay Crane Operations in Container Terminals. Transp. Res.
Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 2022 ,168, 102949. [CrossRef]
40. Abou Kasm, O.; Diabat, A. The Quay Crane Scheduling Problem with Non-Crossing and Safety Clearance Constraints: An Exact
Solution Approach. Comput. Oper. Res. 2019 ,107, 189–199. [CrossRef]
41. Vallada, E.; Belenguer, J.M.; Villa, F.; Alvarez-Valdes, R. Models and Algorithms for a Yard Crane Scheduling Problem in Container
Ports. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2023 ,309, 910–924. [CrossRef]
42. Yang, Y.; Zhong, M.; Dessouky, Y.; Postolache, O. An Integrated Scheduling Method for AGV Routing in Automated Container
Terminals. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2018 ,126, 482–493. [CrossRef]
43. Yin, Y.-Q.; Zhong, M.; Wen, X.; Ge, Y.-E. Scheduling Quay Cranes and Shuttle Vehicles Simultaneously with Limited Apron Buffer
Capacity. Comput. Oper. Res. 2023 ,151, 106096. [CrossRef]
44. Serrano-Ruiz, J.C.; Mula, J.; Poler, R. Job Shop Smart Manufacturing Scheduling by Deep Reinforcement Learning. J. Ind. Inf.
Integr. 2024 ,38, 100582. [CrossRef]
45. Zhang, Z.; Zhuang, Z.; Qin, W.; Fang, H.; Lan, S.; Yang, C.; Tian, Y. A Reinforcement Learning Approach for Integrated Scheduling
in Automated Container Terminals. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and
Engineering Management (IEEM), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 7–10 December 2022; pp. 1182–1186.


=== PAGE 29 ===

Biomimetics 2024 ,9, 516 29 of 29
46. Burcin Ozsoydan, F.; Sa˘ gir, M. Iterated Greedy Algorithms Enhanced by Hyper-Heuristic Based Learning for Hybrid Flexible
Flowshop Scheduling Problem with Sequence Dependent Setup Times: A Case Study at a Manufacturing Plant. Comput. Oper.
Res. 2021 ,125, 105044. [CrossRef]
47. Kheiri, A.; Gretsista, A.; Keedwell, E.; Lulli, G.; Epitropakis, M.G.; Burke, E.K. A Hyper-Heuristic Approach Based upon a Hidden
Markov Model for the Multi-Stage Nurse Rostering Problem. Comput. Oper. Res. 2021 ,130, 105221. [CrossRef]
48. Zhao, F.; Di, S.; Cao, J.; Tang, J.; Jonrinaldi, A. Novel Cooperative Multi-Stage Hyper-Heuristic for Combination Optimization
Problems. Complex Syst. Model. Simul. 2021 ,1, 91–108. [CrossRef]
49. Lin, J.; Zhu, L.; Gao, K. A Genetic Programming Hyper-Heuristic Approach for the Multi-Skill Resource Constrained Project
Scheduling Problem. Expert Syst. Appl. 2020 ,140, 112915. [CrossRef]
50. Guo, H.; Liu, J.; Wang, Y.; Zhuang, C. An Improved Genetic Programming Hyper-Heuristic for the Dynamic Flexible Job Shop
Scheduling Problem with Reconfigurable Manufacturing Cells. J. Manuf. Syst. 2024 ,74, 252–263. [CrossRef]
51. Zhang, S.; Xu, Y.; Zhang, W. Multitask-Oriented Manufacturing Service Composition in an Uncertain Environment Using a
Hyper-Heuristic Algorithm. J. Manuf. Syst. 2021 ,60, 138–151. [CrossRef]
52. Song, H.-B.; Lin, J. A Genetic Programming Hyper-Heuristic for the Distributed Assembly Permutation Flow-Shop Scheduling
Problem with Sequence Dependent Setup Times. Swarm Evol. Comput. 2021 ,60, 100807. [CrossRef]
53. Lim, K.C.W.; Wong, L.-P .; Chin, J.F. Simulated-Annealing-Based Hyper-Heuristic for Flexible Job-Shop Scheduling. Eng. Optim.
2023 ,55, 1635–1651. [CrossRef]
54. Sugianto, W.C.; Kim, B.S. Iterated Variable Neighborhood Search for Integrated Scheduling of Additive Manufacturing and
Multi-Trip Vehicle Routing Problem. Comput. Oper. Res. 2024 ,167, 106659. [CrossRef]
55. Song, H.-B.; Yang, Y.-H.; Lin, J.; Ye, J.-X. An Effective Hyper Heuristic-Based Memetic Algorithm for the Distributed Assembly
Permutation Flow-Shop Scheduling Problem. Appl. Soft Comput. 2023 ,135, 110022. [CrossRef]
56. Soleimanian Gharehchopogh, F.; Abdollahzadeh, B.; Arasteh, B. An Improved Farmland Fertility Algorithm with Hyper-Heuristic
Approach for Solving Travelling Salesman Problem. Comput. Model. Eng. Sci. 2022 ,135, 1–26. [CrossRef]
57. Li, K.; Liu, T.; Ram Kumar, P .N.; Han, X. A Reinforcement Learning-Based Hyper-Heuristic for AGV Task Assignment and Route
Planning in Parts-to-Picker Warehouses. Transp. Res. Part E Logist. Transp. Rev. 2024 ,185, 103518. [CrossRef]
58. Duan, J.; Liu, F.; Zhang, Q.; Qin, J.; Zhou, Y. Genetic Programming Hyper-Heuristic-Based Solution for Dynamic Energy-Efficient
Scheduling of Hybrid Flow Shop Scheduling with Machine Breakdowns and Random Job Arrivals. Expert Syst. Appl. 2024 ,
254, 124375. [CrossRef]
59. Mahmud, S.; Abbasi, A.; Chakrabortty, R.K.; Ryan, M.J. A Self-Adaptive Hyper-Heuristic Based Multi-Objective Optimisation
Approach for Integrated Supply Chain Scheduling Problems. Knowl. Based Syst. 2022 ,251, 109190. [CrossRef]
60. Cui, R.; Han, W.; Su, X.; Zhang, Y.; Guo, F. A Multi-Objective Hyper Heuristic Framework for Integrated Optimization of
Carrier-Based Aircraft Flight Deck Operations Scheduling and Resource Configuration. Aerosp. Sci. Technol. 2020 ,107, 106346.
[CrossRef]
61. Sakawa, M.; Kubota, R. Fuzzy Programming for Multiobjective Job Shop Scheduling with Fuzzy Processing Time and Fuzzy
Duedate through Genetic Algorithms. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 2000 ,120, 393–407. [CrossRef]
62. Holland, J. Adaptation in Natural and Artificial System ; University of Michigan Press: Ann Arbor, MI, USA, 1975; pp. viii–183.
63. Li, S.; Hu, R.; Qian, B.; Zhang, Z.; Jin, H.-P . Hyper-heuristic genetic algorithm for solving fuzzy flexible job shop scheduling
problem. Control Theory Appl. 2020 ,37, 316–330.
64. Dios, M.; Fernandez-Viagas, V .; Framinan, J.M. Efficient Heuristics for the Hybrid Flow Shop Scheduling Problem with Missing
Operations. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2018 ,115, 88–99. [CrossRef]
65. Xing, Y.I.N.; Yu, Z.; Qianqian, Z.; Kexin, T. A Study of Integrated Scheduling of Automated Container Terminal Based on DDQN.
Traffic Inf. Saf. 2022 ,40, 81–91. [CrossRef]
66. Shao, Z.; Shao, W.; Pi, D. LS-HH: A Learning-Based Selection Hyper-Heuristic for Distributed Heterogeneous Hybrid Blocking
Flow-Shop Scheduling. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. Intell. 2023 ,7, 111–127. [CrossRef]
67. Lei, D. A Genetic Algorithm for Flexible Job Shop Scheduling with Fuzzy Processing Time. Int. J. Prod. Res. 2010 ,48, 2995–3013.
[CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.